
* ♦ ♦	o
_j co^	CD


00

LM
CO

CO
00 :
C\J
'M

r			CD
1 o	00	T—	
CO	CD	N.*	CD
’	ID	CM	CM 1
	CD	00	CM
CD	I^	00	
CM	CM	CD	CM
	ID	ID	T
		ID	CD
00	N.		CM
CM	Csi	CO	T-
	00		00
[ ■:	CO	o	X—
	CD	o	o
CM	CO	CM	CD
		ID	CO
			1^
CD	CD	CD	r-.
CM		00	o
	ID	CO 1	CO
		CD	CD
ID	CO	CD	"O*
	CD	CO	CD
	CM	T—	
			m
			
	ID	CO	o".
	CD	00	00
CM	CM	CD	00
	N.		
			ll
	CD	ID	
CO		-^4-	CD^
CM	CM	''t	ID
	N-	CM	ID
			t
		00	
CM		CD	
CM		CD	CD
	CO	CM	T
		CO	CD
T—		CM	
CM	CO	CD 1	CD
	CD		CD
O	CM	00	T“
CM	c6	CD 1	CD
	CD	ID	CO
CD		O	N.
	CD	CD	O
			

m
CD O 00 LO CD
00 C) CD <N
CM	00
CD	T—
00	o
CO	
ID	CD
CM	T—
CD	o
	
CNJ
CM
e' cy	Si	Si SI ^ tfi dots pw liKh (e»ec«i)	Si lA
s'	0| s'	Si Si N> 00	Si CO
T>*
00
CM
CM
00
Hi

>
m h- CD f- o T-
CD O) 00 O T- CM
^ CD CO T- O Tf
CO M^CM
d c>
CO '
CM O CO O CD CM
CM d CI> O) '
CD O CO O Tt T-
CD
ID
CO

CM
^ lO T—
CM lO ID
CM oci CO ID Tj- T-
CM ’T- r^ 05 00 O
CD ^ CD CO T- Tj-
T- CO o
ID CM CD
CO Tt o> CD CO ID
CM CO ID 00 CO
CD CO CD h- CO •
CD CM CD ID 00
ID CD tS ID CM
CD O ID CM 00 00
CO CM T- CM
h- CD CO CO CM
CD Tf CM ^ CM
ID 00 00
CD X- T-
CO
CM Tt h. X-; CM CD
CD CO ID CO y- r-
* * *
—1 CO ^

.•.•.S*.V.*.VSW.VAW.'/.SW/.S*AV.‘.V.W/W.
.V.V.^V^^A^^^V.V.SVW•.^Vw•.VA•.^V/AWA•AV/.SV.V.^^^^W^^.VAPAV
Call/MSS #: Bib ID:
Collection
A6Y
iSinger Mend. Pr3291.
C._°  _____—“—   —
--------
11813680	1




•.•.•A*
.......................... . . .	......S^V.*.V.V.W.*iV.*A*.’A*.*,
•••••••• •• ••••••••• * ■ ■ •••••■■•*
5:
pP.AHV.r.V^/.'.'.'.'.VArVAV/rt'iV.-.

J
Total # Images # Foldouts: Pages To Dig:


294
■« — ^ ^
------- v.,,.w^v.v.v,.v.-.v,.v.v..v.^^^
,VAV.*.S%V.-.-AW.V^--AWVy.-.W.W.-.-AV^>V^^.-.W-V.-.V/.*.V^.-
V.^.V/VA .VA-.-.V.VAV.V.^.-.V/.-.V.V.-.VA^.W.‘.V. .-.V^
I
I
Lv._..s_v.v....™v,v..^----------------------
____________________________________

tvV/WVWWAAVAV

Uv^-AW.NVkWW
Condition Notes:
.^^V.•.^V.^^V.•A^^^VA•.%V.V.^V.VA•.^SV/.^V.^V.W.^^V/.V.^V.V
.V.*.V.VA*.V.V/.*.V.*.V.*A%VASVAV.‘.V.
■.•.•.•.•.•.'.•.V.*A’.NV.*.*.VA'^.*.*i*.V.V.’.V.VAV.'.V.V.V.PAV
AV.V.-.V.VAP.AV/A-ASVA'.V.ASSVWV.^A-A'AW.V.f/ASV.W^WA-AVAV^W/AVJ
3 volumes in 1 book
w





Notes/lnstructions:
..VAV-*A‘.^.»A^i*AWA«.VA«A*A»Ai».






Image name convention:
pr329.Da6_y5_1724_body0001.tif
L_-----—-----------------—'—""
i
M
RARE BOOK COLLECTION
LI BRAKY UN IVERSITYy' PENNSYLVANIA


TT**—"-T.1

• -' ^ Jk:	'a* • 5 :
- ^
-TTrv^SFTT
•R*. ’ ■-


3^--	\'-
-• ''.:l
4<A "'»'..#

ir •.
• •>.■•■* I
‘.v
\ * - ‘^.-,
. * -t-r.
k' A*'-
. '
K -	•<■
11 - -
'	'	■	.i ■
. •	-.y	“*

'\Ai-	■ ri

»^'•
t f.-
HOLNEST
THE PROPERTY OF THE TRUSTEES

. ’1^ -
ilfr
OF THE LATE

\
. • -s.
^’.\' ■
* * ' - • ^
' :'\'	; -I
'	■	• V
'' '.'; ■“
' '■-'*
■ 't
■	*^-v

. . >
f *
1;V.; Vr.;.A -^-CA
1- *: ■. .: V	A L.
V.- .D. ^fk-r Vs.
'■'.' 5^: ,;•, ;L.-. -UU
^'	•'*' • .■'	:	iiti.

L'ikVV

J. S. W. S. ERLE DRAX.
V? /6^K^
/
■

iAv,.'
'i’-'.C
^ Yi.
S-; --te.


i^-
> .r .-
«'	" • '■.■ "
NV-	--N.-
•r r '~ . X.

- *•'• ■
V '. V -
'i'^-
' ' '.'■' ..' ■•' 6. ■
f	V
V	-‘ .	■'.% ' t'” AC
•	-A
.	*	'	M .

t:
. X


•..i • ^





• ''\

• .> f ..c - -
* • W .

•»' “• * » .
V • -•
\
■'•	S-- ' ' . .
'Jr.
'i'r'-y


/
r*
-V;

--

♦vr-
--.j
TI-'
THE
GODFREY F. SINGER
MEMORIAL
PRESENTED BY
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER
y.^J


L <1
*• .c
»,
' .V
A -
:



'■> .- ■ »'
': • r '
• .*	v’5
L	V*	.:*
-•.o :	. >.



< T
. V ■ <-•-. *• ^ •
*-<r
'	. 'JF> f -	.
- - ■ A	’-- V	^ r ■
■ ■ <ai





€
f
I
r
w
f	A • .4 A i
• - ' i AiAr *•’■''
A.
X
■:1^:rd-^-'A--	^
<r

y ./•>'■-.Sc-
-• - V



-t. -vC' -• • -. •-:
- *	.>5 4 ../	'
ir
r.
s
c >•
, r..

[FA
UF
d. *i

,y«'
It'S*'
'vir^

_—'~'V'
^ .


✓ -
--. '/■
*\ -‘'C ■'■• -■ ** ..
** _-• •• ,,'W_ ■*	'	.. --' • "^
S .




X-

\.--rc.
..y.^
Stc?'
* ■«.• -’ ..



5^.0-
V ».


. .•rf’-;
X
-5,
r. '.
• k
‘ . V.
' r
\ .
/
I
-■'■^ r^'-x, ■-;
* - •• ■>:
' I

1

_• i ^
ft
.*•.





z'


\


THE
V



A
N
V
m
By a Young Lady,
Love^ like a Meteory Jhews a Jhort-li'V'd Blaz^e ,
Or treads thrK njo^i^us, Skdes- a 'voand^ringMaz.e
Begot by Fancyy aiidriby Fancy led ;
Here in a Moment, in a Moment fled

Btit px*d by Obligationsy it •will loft ; *'
For Gratitude's the Charm that binds it fafl.
&
Lansdown.



m. >•
3
tmaran
i
LONDON X
I Printed for J. Robert s, near the Oxford Arms in JVdiwick-Lane. M.dcc.xxiv.
(Price I L <5 d.)
r
V .
\
BU

f
\
•. -C- . • Fr.dj
- ■ r.
■At
\ : -

-. r
'A.	'---. r
•^, .*L	A. -K
'■■r -\'^>’'
-A'	. •
' -=	-si.- -■
C« *
"kV.
\

1
u. of Pa.
Library
c^;
rO^‘
CP
4

V
i
V
N
J ^
(V
L* •
>5
#
; i
VC--
I-. I
N
( “i )
To the Incomparable
Mrs. Eliza Haywood.
M
L ALP ERL being fo common in a Dedication^ 1 rejolvd to-chufe a Perfon whofe Merit the IVorld was too well acquainted with., to caufe
being
the leafl Sufp
of my
\

of that mean Vice, being what 1 ahuays tefs
Mind., {particularly when 1 am fo fortunate to find ^em in my~*iwm-Fex) Ifhall have reach*d the height
Pleafi
ify

tfcious. if 1 fhould
more to
ifance than fiidg
flowing Stile, which in your rnatchlef Writing, like Orpheush Harmony, rouz,es the dulleft Mind. AO (till then) unknown Pkafures, or generous Pity which bef ore they were as little capable of, as hi dancing Groves, Stones, or groveling Brutes.
ihe Misfortunes (f your Eair-cnes, are repre fented with fo forcible, fo natural a Delicacy, par uculnrly of Emanuella; that in Lears we confefs
.fl
for her cruel relentlefs Fate, as fh n never-ending Sorrows to bemoan that on ep that robVd her of her Fame, her Repofe laft her Life. A z
«■ f
i h Q -I \ ^
iV	Dedication.
Above all, who can read without being infpired wftth uncommon Delight, her maternalTendernefs for
jhen fhe defends to fuch mean
offices fo unfuitable
Difirefs
ifi exalted, as if h
Mind Ilrove by thofe intolerable Difficulties make him fame amends for the Severity of Fortt in the cruel Inhumanity of a Father, and her fond Credulity,
But tho* 1 am willing to exprefs with what PI fure I have been agreeably amufed feveral Hours reading your delightful IVorks, I am fenjibh
Not
if a judgment much tfinitely more refined
Boldnefs, to ajfureyou^ that incomparable Play you were pleafed to fhow me part of in Manufcript, will be efleemed by the mofi excellent fudges^ a match-lefs Piece, and make your Fame as ithmortal, tho' in a different way, as the never-dying Sapho.
All I have mentioned of your PerfeSlions, is already conjpicuous to the World, but the affable Pali tenefs of your Converfation, is what only can he known, and enjoy*d by an Intimate j and indeed that excellent Good-Breeding fo apparent in your Writing, adds an uncommon Lufire to your other good Senfe, which is fiill greater, by being joined to
fuch
1	/	J ^ J
h and UnpolifVd often endeavour to atone for want of that Accomplifhment.	/ am, with
ReJpeB due to your extraordinary Merits^
Madam,
Your moft Obedient
Humble Servant,
MAA.
I
R
THE
u
D
E.
H E Politer Part of the were alSembled in Gardens of the Royal Palace to view each other, and the gay Beauties of the Spring, which then began to throw forth all her Sweets ; teii thoufand different Objeds attracted the Sight, thro’ the Spacious Walks ; Brilliants^ and the more Sparkling Shine of Lovely Eyes, created a bright Track refembling the Milky-Way,and Beauty fhew’d itSelf in all the various Changes which Time makes, from the opening Bud of early Touthy to its falling Autumn j nor did that lovely Goddefs vary lefs in her many Arts to
than thole whom cruel Time had
cauSed Such ill-natur’d Diftinctions between ; for there you might at once behold, according to their peculiar Genius’s, the indolent, the haughty, the condeScending, and the lively Co-ffuety that by a thoufand airy Affedations invited to the Chafe thofe who wanted only A-
B	muSement,
Z	‘The r ft u D E.
muSement i whilft the Severe Pvude^ with Sullen Blufhes, and now and then an unaware Glance, bid the Beholder to more Solid Joys.
Nor were the Gentlemen leSs skill’4 than the Ladies, either in the Art of Dreding, of Affedation, it being now-a-days the mod pow'-erful Magnetick by which the Fair and Brave drive to attrad each other: but, as it has been obServM, that Valour is always more elleem’d by the Softer Sex .Wtfdom, So it is certain in this AlTembly there were more aJfuPd than vtife Looks.
Of the firft Stamp is Poloniusbis chief Accomplifhment is an inimitable Adurance, the Indulgence of a great Perfon who was fond of liis childish Prattle, contributed towards liis attaining. So high a Perfedion thati way 5 None ever had So ready an Art as he, in dfawi into the Cheeks of the Fair the fineft , Vermilion, tho it is not in the power of human Art to create the lead Tindure; in hisr
t was in
this gay Alfembly he attacked two young La-Chr the company of another more advanc’d in Years. The confcious Shame that appearM in their Looks at his looSe NonSenSe, fhew’d they were not So reiinedly bred, as to enter into a fashionable Parley, ’till Emelia^ the elded, perceiving the Company began to obferve them, tiirn’d to him, aiid with Looks which expreSs’d her Refentment much more than her Words, Said, Sir, have theSe Ladies or I given you any Offence, that you preSume on theSe unuSual Liberties with us, who do not exped this Sort of Treatment from one that has the appearance of a Gentleman ? To which the confident Youth reply *d. Beauty like theirs will never offend me,
if
‘The Probe

if they have but the Good-nature to heal the Wounds their Eyes haye' made'. It has been very offenlive to
an
fwer^d Emelia, in a more angry Accent than nejore, lince it has caufed you to treat them , in a manner they are Strangers to, and delfte ftill to continue fo.
You may perhaps be.....
refum'd he pertlyy and the Ladies may hot defire to continue fo ignorant as you would per^ fuade them : And why thtny added hef	yoii
fo cruel to hinder me from imparting that happy Knowledge to them, I am fenfible your La^* dyfhip’s Experience can be no flranger to;? Emeliay flung to the quick at this Infolencei told him his Tutor Should be acquainted with his audacious Follies, to prevent his receiving a Severe Chaftifement elfe-where. The
Polonius finding by fe^/zTs lafl Reply She knew more of him than his Drefs, was jufl returning her a Shocking Anfwer, when LyfanIer, who had heard what paSsM between them, (tho’a Stranger) approaching Emelia	an
Air of Refpebl, faid. Ladies, be pleasM to give me leave to wait on you to your Coach. She readily offering him her Hand, they went fome Paces from Poloniusy whom they left muttering his disappointed Refentment, in a Tone Somewhat more cautioufly. S When
cautioufly.
addrefling himSelf to Emelia, faid. Madam I took the liberty to approach you, as if acquainted, judging it the mofl effeflual way. to free you from, the Uneafinefs w'hich I perceived the Indiscretion of Polonius occafionM. We think ourfelves indebted to you, reply*d that JIadyy for your uncommon Complaifance, being
rpp little ufed to the Town, to enter into
B 2	Cheva
4
Fhe Prude.
Chevalier ConverSation ; and indeed own I am fo very ill bred, as to wonder how Women can poffibly bear his. But let us leave this Place, continued (he, which is very unfit for us. On which they quitted the Walks to go diredly to their Coach, whither Lyfander attended them, Moll of the DifcourSe thither was between him and Emelia; the refpe(5i:ful Diftance with which he treated the Ladies, not at all aflu-ming on the feafonable Civility he had render’d them, . caufed Emelia to expreSs herSelf in a manner fo obliging, as fhew’d fhe was not in-fenlible of the Favour, Decency feeming only to hinder her from deliring to commence an Acquaintance with him ; And Lyfander^ who had full Modefty enough for fo accomplish’d a Gentleman, thought he Should reSemble too much the confident Pohnius. to make the leaft Attempt that way. For tho’ the Beauty of Bellamira (which was the youngefi: of the two Ladies that accompanied Emelia) had created flronger Defires, and more violent Emotions in his Soul, than he ever had been fenfible of before; yet there was fomething in Emelia that made him timorous, and afraid to offend her by prefuming too far. Juft as She was ftep-ping into her Coach, She told Lyfander She thought the Lady and herfelf fo much oblig’d to him for fo opportune a Relief, that She was confident. Should either of their Families ever have the HappineSs to know him, he would find their Acknowledgements equal to his Merits. Qn which Lyfander reply’d, that he deferved too little to recommend himfelf to fo great an Ilonourj whatever his Ambition was ; and w’ith a refpcdful Bow wichdrewh though he
fo
‘The Prude.
5
fo perfedly comprehended Emelias lall Words, as to judge his Acquaintance would not be diSplealing, were it in his power to be introduced in a way fit for them to receive him. To that end, having hrft obferv’d the Arms and Livery, he diSpatch’d a Courier he knew, there being Numbers who wait about thofe Places, and are known to Gentlemen that frequent them ; Lyfander ftridly charging him not to lofe light of the Coach, till he had learnt all their Names, and where each one dwelt.
The MelTenger foon difpatchM the Affair, with a Skill peculiar to that fort of People ; and returning, came where Lyfander appointed, acquainted him the Coach went di-redly home, where he learnt from the Servants themfelves, that Emelia was a Country Gentlewoman, intruded by the Parents of the young Ladies, who had been dead many Years, with the Care of their Education, becaufe fhe was efleem’d a very prudent Perfon, and was MiftreSs of a great Eftatei that fince then, Elijinda the eldeft Siller had a vafl Fortune left her by a Grandmother; and as foon as Ihe became of Age, fhe had her own Equipage and Servants, living by herfelf, tho now whilft they {laid in Town they all- were at BellgranLs., Brother to Elifinda and Bedamira. With this Account Lyfander return’d home, fully Satisfy’d he had difeover’d enough to find the means to be introduced to their Acquaintance, this Day’s trifling Adventure having made an unufual Impreflion on him. The Charms of Bedamira now Supplying the place of balmy Reft, which indeed were too powerful to behold with indifference i her Shape and
Features
6
The P
4 V	. 4^.
Features being exactly formed, with a Complexion inimitable by Art: But where is Piuan Stroke, that ' can defcribe her matchlefs Mein, which at once infpires Love and
with an Innocence fo perfed, that a Savage Heart might as well attempt to hurt a harmlefs Infant, as give her the leaft
; and if She W'anted the poignant Wit and lively Airs fome are fo agreeably Millrefles ofj yet all She faid was mixt with Such ah obliging Sweetnefs, and her Words flovvM with fo Soft an Accent, as with irrefillible Force Seizes on the Faculties, and quite difarms the Mind, like the moft harmonious Inllruments, when touchM by skilful Hands. Lyfander had already gazed too long, not to, feel all their Influence ; the plealing In-fedion had Seiz’d too ftrong, for any Dilficuties or even Difpair to cure, tho’ he was confcious her Birth and Fortune were far above his Hopes ; nor was he infenlible that Love and Ambition are the two fatal Paflions that oftner
• ••	*.	M . •
hurry Youth into irreparable Miferies, than raife then'i to an envied Height ; for w
rea-
fon he refplvM to curb the Reins of his, and tread with - cautious Steps, that if he did fMl, it might be gently and unperceived. Amidfl; thefe various Refle<5i;ions, he could determine on nothing more, but to further his irreSiftible .De-lires of getting acquainted with the Ladies, and leaving the reft to Fortune, which hitherto had favour’d him in an extraordinary man? ner ; he having been very liberally educated by a GentlenlaU that gave no other reafon for it, than that his Father w^as his particular Friend, and as foon as he was capable, purchafed him

i
I
Prude.
a very conliderable Employment, ftill keeping him in his Houfe as his Son. This Gentleman, whom I Shall mention by the Name of Olarius^ was the younger Brother of a noble Family ; and having a Genius more inclined to Contemplation than Adfivityj enterM into Holy Or* ders, by which means he had a large Benefice to his own Fortune, which was not inconlide* Table for a younger Brother. He had all the
Virtues and true Devotion which the World
• »
exped in a Clergyman^ and reproach the want of, his Inftrudions being blended with as much good Manners as Senfe,* and there appearM Such an affable PoliteneSs in what* ever he Said or did, that the Young liften*d to him with RefpeAand Pleafure ; The Poor of all degrees were his Care j through his Houfe Was feen an hoSpitable Plenty, without the leaft mixture of Debauchery. He never married, Which, fome young Ladies related, in freedom u fed to tell him, was owing to the per-verfe Treatment of a Beauty he loved when younger. He had for Lyfander all the Ten-dernefs of a real Father, having brought him wp frdm between two and three Years old, and indeed the Virtues and Ingenuity of that young Gentleman recompens’d his Care: but %vhat moll:	d Lyfander^ was, he never
made the leaft mention of his Parents or Relations to him, tho’he often took an opportunity, by expreffing his Gratitude, to introduce a Difcourfe that might lead Olarius to fay Something of them ; but, on the contrary, he found he ftill artfully avoided it. This was the ftate of his Affairs when he firft faw BeL lamha^ whom he refolved with all his Ad-
drefs
/
The Prude.
drefs to get acquainted with. He had ofteH met Bellgrand in publick AlSemblies, but had no particular Intimacy with him, which was owing to his not defiring it; he knowing his Charader and Turn of Temper too well to fear any great difficulty in the accomplifhing his new Defign that way : tho* Bellgrand is fo ex-treamly proud of being born to a great Eftate, that he looks on all whom Fortune has not made fo happy that way as himfelf, as if created with inferiour Faculties, and form’d of coarfer Materials, not that his Looking-Glafs has not often conxhnc’d him of the laft Error. However, ancient Birth, Titles, and a polite Education have all their force in making him think he is Something extraordinary, as indeed he is, his native Country having nothing in it but what is too low, too plain, and infipid for his refin’d Genius; who has not a Pidure in his HouSe, or a Statue in his Garden, which moll of the Princes of Europe have not ftrove by immenfe Sums to purchafe, which he by out-bidding obtain’d. Youths as effeminately foft as thofe that guard the Ajlan Fair, gaily drefs’d in graceful Order, wait in each Apartment thro’which the Vifitants paSs. Mufick is his chief Delight, in which he has exqui* Site Skill, and fo nice an Ear, that the harfh Crack of a Country Fiddle has often made him ready to Swoon ; which Accomplifhment Lyfan-der knowing, contriv’d it fo as to make it the means of his obtaining his Defigns on the Ladies : He having a Violin, which moft of the great Artifts in that heavenly Science efteem’d fo excellent in its kind, he took care to fall, as if accidentally, three or four times in Belh
grand^s
‘The Prude.
9
grand.s way ,* where Mulick being at length the Theme, he mentioned the Excellence of this Inftrument, which firing Bellgrand immediately with a Curiolity to hear it play’d on, he defir’d Lyfander to let one of his Mu-ficians try it. But the other anfwer’d him. That in a few days Olarius intended to entertain Some Ladies with a Piece, he believ’d, of good Mulick, in Concert with this Violin; and he was confident that Olarius^ as well as himSelf, would be extremely proud if he would honour them with his Company ; which Bedgrand accepted, in Terms that fhew’d he was obliged by the Invitation.
Lyfander, who had laid this Bait to commence an Acquaintance, refolv’d to have a more powerful one to continue it; for which reafon, he prevail’d on Olarius to invite Ari-ana, a great Fortune, to this Entertainment ; knowing Bellgrand valued himSelf too much to look with regard on any Lady, who was not liberally endow’d with that Accomplifh-ment. Olarius, who had the Concert, in com^ pliance to Lyfander^s Requeft, left the ordering of it intirely to him, who took care to have all things managed with a PoliteneSs Suitable to Bellgrand^ refin’d TaSie : Nor did he fail to omit one Opportunity of infinua-ting all Ariana^s Perfeftions, join’d with So vaft a Fortune, which had the defired Effedt: for he was fo transported with the Mulick, and her Charms, which Shone thro’ the adr ditional Luftre of ten thoufand Pounds worth of Jew'els, fo Sparklingly bright, not only tp dazzle his Eyes, but all his SenSes.
C
It
10
Lhe Prude.
It was now that he began to think Lyfander a Perfon of nice Judgment, and wonderM how it was poflible he had not made an earlier DiScovery of So many accomplish’d Parts : He paid all his Devoirs to Anana^ who is prodigious fond of the Compliment, how de-fpicably Soever (lie thinks of the AddrelSer j and with a Secret Pride ftrives to ingroSs all the Gallantry to herSelf, whilft Several discontented Ladies Surround her unregarded. This Humour of her’s gave Bellgrand Such encouraging Hopes, that never Man parted Irom Company better pleas’d than he j not but he felt himSelf a little enviouSiy touch’d, to hnd a plain home-bred Gentleman Should have aimoft as elegant a Talle of living as him-
lelf.
The very next Morning he made Lyfander a Vilit, telling him he was So charm’d with Ariana, that he came to intreat his Aflillance towards the obtaining her; which muft be done, added he., by your influencing Olarius to be my Friend ; who, I underhand from Ari-nna^ is particularly acquainted with her Father. Nothing could be more pleafing to Lyfander^ than this DiScourSe of Bellgrand^s ,* who anSwered him, with a PromiSe of all his intereft in Olarius, if, when he had thought more Serioufly on it, he found himfelf inclin’d to purSue the Ddign. On this, Bellgrand took him in his Arms, protefting there was nothing he more earnehly defired; and if he would but leijd his Aid, he was Sure to accomplish it, which wmuld eternally bind him his Friend. Lyfander returning theSe Compli-prents with all Aflurances on hi$ Side, Bell-
grand
Fhe Prude. ii
€ .
grand would not part with him that Day. They went out together; and after they had Spent the Morning in the uSual AmuSements of the Town, BeUgrand carry’d Lyfander home to dinner with him.
Ic*s now time to return to the Ladies : Emeliay who from the firft Moment She Saw Lyfander, had taken an uncommon liking to him, did nothing but talk of him as She was returning home,praifing his handSome AddreSs, the Graces of his Perfon, and above all, hisMo-defty and Refpeci: : In Ihort, She Said So much to his advantage, that the Ladies began to rally her, by telling her if file had been as young as the handfome Stranger, they Should
was fallen a little in love
I
0
have fuSpefted Sh with him. To which Emelia anfwerM,
know not but I might ,* but as it is, were his Birth and Fortune Suitable, I Should willa he were a Husband to Eellamira, whofe Hap-pineSs I defire equally with my own. Bell-grand had been in the Ladies Apartment that Morning, before he went to Lyfander, and told them how agreeably he was entertain’d the Night before by him, of whom he Spoke So ad-vantageoufly, as raiSed aCuriofity in the Ladies to See him. But Emelia was pleafingly Surpriz’d, when, being Soon after brought. She found he was the Same that not a Fortnight before had freed them from a troubleSome Adventure ; and approaching him with an Air that ex-prefs’d her Satisfadion, Said, Sir, I promis’d if ever w^e had the happinefs to be acquainted with you, you Should not find us inSenfible of the Obligation we then receiv’d: And lam cer*' tain, continu’d fJoe, BeUgrand too great an E-
C 2	' fteem
f
/
X
12, Fhe Prude.
fteem for Lyfandev, not to be infinitely pleas’d to find it is to him he owes the Protedion of his Sillers. Lyfander^ arm’d for this Encounter, exprefs’d a Surprize equal to that of the Ladies, returning the Compliment with how much he thousht himSelf honour’d in Serv-
ing PerSons of their Merit, and Bellgrand*s Relations: the young Ladies, joining the Dif-courfe, Eellamira told him with an Air of SwcetneSs peculiar to her, on his terming of the Service he had render’d them as a Trifle, it was a Civility none there had the Good-Nature to attempt befides himfelf. At Dinner the Conversation was wound up to a very agreeable Height j Emelia wars never heard to talk So gaily bright as then, and Xy-jander convinc’d the whole Company he had a Genius that deServed to be regarded by the politefl: Part of Mankind.
Emelia, before they parted, let him under-fland his Vifits would not be diSpleafing to her, which was thoroughly delightful to Xy-fander i for, befides the hopes of Seeing Bella' mira, in whom all his Defires were center’d, yet he found in himSelf a Regard for Emelia; which, tho’ it could not be Love, had Something too reSpedfully tender for even Friendship, mix’d with an Awe and Fear, to offend her.
The Lady’s Vifiters beginning to come, Lyfander withdrew with Bellgrand; who renewing his Sollicitations concerning Ariana, he promis’d Speedily to open the	to Olarius ^
which, [aid he, as I defire it Should prove Successful, I muft try to infinuate with Some Artifice, which, I am certain, will be necefl'ary to
in-
7he Prude.

incline him to move in it, becaufe he is very cautious of meddling in any one’s Affairs, especially Marriages, not that I intirely defpair of prevailing on him : and So, for that Day, took his leave.
Lyjander did not fail in the leaft Tittle of his Promifes to Bellgrand; he Soon Spoke to Olanus, representing to him the Advantage of Bellgrand’s Birth, which was much Supe-riour to Ariand.s ; befides a confiderable Eftate in that Family, She would have no Examples which were not of the ftridell Virtue; making large Encomiums on the Merits of Emelia and Bellamira: but for the Piety and Dev^otion of Elifmda, it was known to the whole Town : adding. In his private Opinion, he thought Le Merchant, Aht Father of Ariana, ought to elleem himSelf honour’d in the Alliance of Such a Family as Bellgrand’s. Thefe ReaSons, with the Influence he had on Olarius, eafily inclin’d him to Speak to Aria-na’s Father about it, who was pleaSed with the Offer ; and Lyfander carried the delightful News to Bellgrand, before he imagin’d he had So much as mention’d it to Olarius. The intended Bridegroom met the Father at his HouSe, a Treaty of Marriage went betw’een the two Families, with a SucceSs equal to the Lovers Wifhes; and Ariana, whoSe Ambition was fully gratify’d by this Match, receiv’d Bellgrand.s Vifits by the Command of her Father, now only waiting the Lawyer’s Settling the Jointure and other Writings.
In the interim, the Ladies who were brought acquainted on this occafion with each other,
deter-
14
Prude.
/
determin’d to go together to the MaSquerade; except	hJvhoSe Seeming Piety was of
too pure a Strain to admit a Thought of her entering into fuch a Place ; for which reafon, the fame Day, as foon as She had dined. She retired with Stanijfa her Friend, to a little Seat She had three Miles out of Town, there to give a greater Loofe to their Contemplations ; but of what fort, the Reader will eali-ly judge, by the following Relation, being forc’d to traverfe backwards into this Lady’s Hiftory, before file can be brought into the Scene of preSent Adtion.
Elijinda is tall, her Shape free and eafy, with a Complexion of the purell White, with* out the leaft Tincture of Red ; her Hair is of that golden Colour fo celebrated in the Poets Songs, with Features but indifferent; her Eyes, moving with a heavy Deadnefs, are generally fix’d on the Ground, with fo confcious a Shame, as if afraid to advance their Lids, as dreading to encounter Looks too amorous, and too warm for fo cold Cha-ftity and fo Ifrid a Virtue, as that which ftie profelfes. This exceffive Modefty in her Looks is correfpondent to all her outward A<9:ions, eachWeek feveral Days are Set a- part for Prayers and Falling j and fuch is her Abhorrence of Vice, that no Perfons of what (Quality foever are admitted within her Doors, that have the leaft Taint on their Reputations. Then to prevent thd Scandals of the Malicious, her Chaplains are always old, and only come at fix’d Times to perform their Office: Tho’ EmeliVs real Virtues w^ere the Original from whence fhe fo artfully copy’d all her feeming ones;
yet
'The Prude.
15
yet fhe carry’d her’sto fo great a Height, that the other, like a feeble Light, appear’d al-nioft extinguish’d by the Attradion of her fuperiour Brightnefs.
Elijindas great Fortune, which is already mention’d, left by a Grandmother, occalion’d her being delir’d in marriage by a number of conliderable Families, which She ftill re~ fufed ; fearing, as Ihe faid, that in this lewd irreligious Age it would be impoffible for her to find a Husband, that in the leaft could match her exalted Virtues; But alas! how different were the real Sentiments of her Heart, being fill’d whth Defires quite conr trary to all this outward Piety ? It is not to be determin’d whether it be owing to her Constitution, that certainly has more Fire in it than is natural to fo cold a Climate, or the good Inftrudion of Stamjfa, who has experienc’d as many Lovers as Religions; fhe is a diftant Relation to Elifinda^ and from her early Youth they were Companions. She had not been with her long, before one of Eli-lindas Footmen captivated her, more by the manly Beauties that appearM thro his whole Frame, than by the Delicacy of his Features, or the Excellency of his Underftanding. She generouSly experienc’d him firft herSelf, and then perfuaded Elijinda to partake of thq extatick Pleafure: All the happy Moments between the Lover and the Ladies were at Emelias HouSe ; tho’ the Secret w^as divulg’d to none, Stanijfa was too cunning to let even a trufty Chamber-maid into it: for the Lover having the Freedom of the lovver part of the Lfoufe, as Soon as the Familv were wrapt in
lound
i6
Prude.
found Sleep, he without Shoes, in a white Sheet, took his lilent Walks up an unfrequented Pair of Stairs, which for many Years had been efteemM haunted. He was once or twice met by Some of the Servants, which had this happy Effed for the Lovers, that on the moil emergent Occafions none of them could be prevail’d on to go nigh that part of the Houfe after it was dark : Nay, Bellgrand himSelf, who came to fee his Sifters after his Travels, and had heard Several unaccountable Stories, which the Peoples Fears had magnify’d, tho he Seem’d then to turn it into ridicule j yet they made fo great an Impreflion on him, that one Night, returning late from the Garden, as the neareft way to his Apartment, he went up thefe Stairs j where, meeting this Pidure, it fo dreadfully frighten’d him, that he fell in a Swoon, and had like to have dy’d for want of Help.
This rather increas’d their Mirth, than cauSed them to be the leaft alarm’d, not but they pretended a Fear greater than the reft, especially the Fellow on whom no Bribe could prevail to go nigh that Parc of the Houfe after it was dark ,•
felt Secret Fears of meeting in reality what
However, he was So
yet it’s certain he often
he but represented, aw’d by their Power, and flatter’d by their Gifts, as not only to be Secret, but faithfully divided himfelf between them, till he fell into a Ccrfifumption, of which he dy’d ; his charitable MiftreSs, in her great Companion, having a tender Care taken of him, being even at the Charge of Sending him a reat diftance for the change of better Air.
The
p
17
The Joy to find her Reputation had fo happy an EScape, very much ballanc’d the lofs of him who flie for Some time pall had efteemM a ufe-lefs Lover; and now being at age, by the Advice of StaniIfa, Ihe chofe to live by her-felf, to be under the lefs reftraint, not omitting the Setting up an Equipage, tho very unufual in a Lady fo young : yet her prudent Condud, with Virtues fo excelling, was fo far proof againft every Scandal, that the Young and Gay look’d on her with Fear and Envy, hearing eternal Reproaches from their Parents and grave Relations, for being wanting in thofe pious Perfedions which Shone fo confpicuoully in all her Adions.
This exalted Charafter, her great Fortune, with a PerSon tolerably handSome, in fpite of all her Repulfes, created a Crowd of Matrimonial Lovers, that ftrove who Should be the happy Man that might obtain the Honour of being bound in her golden Chains. A-mongft thefe numberlefs Lovers, there was one whofe Soft pliant Temper Shew’d more of a fweet Difpolition, than any great Depth of Underllanding. This was the only Per-fon Elifinda ever had thoughts of natvxvmg Husband, which She imparted to Stanijfa,, with the Reafons that induc’d her, (as having already had Some Proofs of Pregnancy^ Such a Husband might not be amifs to father her Children : But StaniIfa, who at that time was better acquainted with Mankind than herSelf, told her, Marriage would be a Bane to all her Happinefs; For a Husband, /aid Jhe, is too near a Spy on your Adions, let his Capacity be ne’er fo weak, for you
^ a
D
poffibly
i8
The Prude.
they
are
poflibly to amuSe him with thofe gilded fhows of Virtue, which ealily paSs on the diftant World; he has a Right to exad from you where you go, and how long you ftay, and, on the leaft Suspicion, you muft move like Clock-work at his Will and Pleafure. You have now, added /he, no other Care than that of inventing. Some piauhble Bulinefs to employ your People when you have not a mind
Ihould be prying into what you doing : but when you are married, they are his Servants, and to conceal from him, you muft lie more open to them. Now Should they difcern any thing, the fear of being turn’d out of doors will make them blind as you could wifh j but when they know there is a Power fuperiour to your’s, if you do not
their Infolence, and gratify their greedy Covetoufnefs, which will grow' daily "on them, they’ll firft whifper it round to his Relations, who will irritate him to bring you to publick Shame; and in his greatGenerofity, perhaps he may be brought to allow you one fer Cent, out of your own Eftate. Belides, furfu*d Stanilfa, Should that Miracle happen of never being discover’d, do not imagine his Folly will be any Security for his not wandering. Fools have no Idea beyond Senfa-tion, which miift be gratify’d by Variety ; he’ll foon loath that conftant infipid Feaft of a Wife, and on fome unknown Flirt, lavifh not only the Love that Should be your’s, but your very Fortune muft go to make the gaudy Thing, with an Equipage, ftare you in the face; whilft, without hope of RedreSs, you muft then in earneft fly to your Clofet, and
pray
’The Prude.
19
pray for Patience; and there are too many Grijfels in this Age, for you to exped by all theSe Sufferings to have your Name chanted in English Ballads, or more melodious Songs by the It alt am : No, continVd (he, the Woman that expeds Happinefs in Marriage, muft have an Underllanding as conformable to that of her Husband, as Echo is to the Sound ; fhe is only to think the fame thing o’er again, he has thought before j and love him with So entire a FondneSs, as to imagine his very Follies fuperiour Perfedions to the reft of Mankind.
I
Elifindafenfible there was too much ReaSon in what Stanijfa faid, not to divert her from every Thought of Marriage, refolv-ing from that moment, like the great Queen Eliz,abeth, to have it writ on her MarbleMo-nument. She dy*d a fpotlefs Virgin.
Thus all her diScarded Lovers were left to comfort themSelves under fo great a Dif-appointment, according to their Several Inclinations, though iCs certain moft of them chofe rather to forget her by the help of Sparkling Champain, than in diftraded Plaints mourn her Lofs by the Soft Murmurs of a ftlver Stream. Stanorius happening to be in company with Some of theSe deSpairing Swains, heard them curSe their rigid Fate, and her more rigid Scorn j at the Same time admiring the exalted Virtue which had blafted all their ambitious Delires. He, on the contrary, had met Such reliftleSs SucceSs in all his Adventures with the Fair, as fix’d in him a general ill Opinion of their Chaftity j tho’ he had as uncontroulM a Daring in Love as Wgr, yet
D 2	he




F.
Prude.
he always Soften’d his AddrelSes with So much good Manners, that imperceptibly he gain’d their Hearts. It was impoffible for him to hear So much talk of Elijlndd.s cold Indifference, without being fired with a delire to try if (he could prove a Rock againft all his artful Batteries : he had feen her, and fancy’d there was too knowing a Modefty in her Looks. Befides the common ill Opinion, his own Experience had convinc’d him, her colour’d Hair was rather a Symptom of Flames, Raptures, and Darts, than So much Ice. He had the Skill to turn himfelf into every fort of Lover, agreeable to the Nymph in purSuit j and imagining the way to prevail on Elifinda^ if at all, would be in the following manner 5 accordingly contriv’d, in an unknown Hand, to fend her this Letter.
e

€
Ito ELISINDJ.
Madam t
TH E Contempt with which you have
juftly treated all who have prefum’d to court your Fortune, under the ancient honourable Pretences of Matrimony, Shews you have a Headier Courage, and Genius exquilitely more refinM, than the reft of your Sex.
‘ But tho the fair Elifinda defpifes thoSe fordid Wretches, are there no Hopes for him who only Seeks your lovely Self ? I am confident that you, who have So nice a Discernment, and have Squar’d your Adions with So Solid, So excellent a Judgment, muft have a Soul form’d of quicker and warmer Mate-
' ‘	■	■'	'	^ rials,
P R U I> E.
i£

c
€
rials, than appears in thofe frozen Looks. Yes, Elifinda, your happy Lover would enjoy Delights as far above what all your Sex can give, as your Underftanding is fu-periour to their’s. What Blifs then mufli he be fillM all o’er with, that can prefs you clofe, clofe to his fluttering Heart 1 The very thought makes me ready to run mad, and do extravagant Things to obtain you. Did I not know it were the certain way to lofe you for ever, I fwear by the Honour ‘ that to a Soldier is facred, no Tortures, nor ‘ Pleafures, fliall force me to reveal the lealt ‘ Favour the lovely Elifinda fhall bellow :
‘ Then throw off the Difguife, and receive ‘ a Lover that loves, adores, and doats with-‘ out the leafli view of Interell; for I, alas i ‘ am already gall’d with a Matrimonial ^ Chain: but eternally, by Inclination, will ‘ be your’s.’
Never was Surprize equal to that ofD//-' finda^s on her reading this Letter ; fhe imagined it was fent to affront her, and concluded fome of her Secret Rambles with Stanijfa were discover’d, having had no particular Amour fince the lofs of him on whom fhe bellow’d the glorious Prize of Virgin Honour. What moll amaz’d her, was, how poflibly the Perfon that fent the Letter, Should'be fo perfedly acquainted with the very Sentiments of her Soul: fhe flew with it to Stanijfd.s Chamber, to try if fhe could unravel the meaning ; who, after fhe had read it over three or four times, told her fhe thought there appeared niore of a bold irregular Pafljoii, than any de-
fign
X •
11 The Prude.
fign of Ridicule, or Affront : however, aiided fl>e, fend an Anfwer negligently fcornful, inftead of refenting Anger ; but on Enquiry, they found the Meffenger Ilaid for none. She took it to her CloSet, where the oftener fhe perufed it, the more fhe defir’d to know the pleafing Author, having hitherto only tailed the groffeft part of Love, contrary to her Sex, who with the lofs of their Innocence defcend by degrees to that Meannefs fhe begun with: and tho’ the dillant Bows and awful Cringes of her matrimonial Admirers, were too infipid for her Ladylhip’s high Gull; yet fhe imagined unknown Joys, in a Lover that would feize her like a bold Ravifher fired with eagerer Defires than whgt were meerly owing to Con-ftitution ; Nor was it long before her Wifhes were accomplifh’d; for within two Days Sta^ norius Sent a Letter by one of his own Servants to this effed.
STJNORIUS to EL IS I NT) A
Madam,
believe your Ladyfhip within this three days received a Letter of fuch a Naturcj as none evTr preSumed on the like to you before ; if you pleaSe, I will punifh the Offender for you, or put it in your power, by acquainting you who he is, to treat him as you fhall judge he deServes.
Your Ladyfliip’s
moll Obedient
Humble Servant
SLANORIUS,
Sta*
Fhe Prude.
n

Stamnus was not without the Reflexion, that if Elijlnda was in reality fuch as fhe appeared, he Should hear from her by a grave Relation ; which if he did, he refolv’d to lay it on a young Gentleman that was lately run mad, and the firft Symptoms that difcover’d his being infeded with that Difeafe, was writing of Letters to Perfons of Quality, whoSe Names were only known to him. At firft they determined to have Sent a Relation, when confidering it more clofely, Ihe and Stanijja refleded, he was really galled with that Clog of Matrimony fo heavily complained of in the Letter, they wondered a Man of Pleafure Should be So bufy in what fo little concerned him, he being very Slightly acquainted with them ; befideSj his Morals were known to be too loofe, to make Things of this nature a grave Bufinefs; all which Circumftances caus’d them to miftruft he was the Offender, who would put himfelf in Elijindas power, to be treated as She Should judge he deferved: Which made them prefently refolve, Stanijfa only Should vifithim from her. What inclined them fo willingly to enter into a Correspondence with him, they were Senfible, tho’ very uncommon, he always had the ill Nature to leave the Ladies at the trouble of expoling them-Selves, without contributing in the leaft his
Help.
Morning Stanijfc
and in violent Terms exclaimed againft the infolent Prefumption of him, who dared to offend EliJindVs chafte Thoughts by fuch an indecent Treatment. The Crime, anfwePd Sta^
norms
2./L
The Prude.
mrius, were unpardonable if known ^ but as it IS, added he, I hope the Fair Elifinda is not much offended. No ! replied Ihe how can you imagine fhe does not refent it, as the moil egregious Affront that could be offered her ? And how is it poilible, continued Stanijfa, it fhould not be known fince it has already reach’d you, and no doubt, by the fame means will Spread thro’the whole Town ? My being acquainted with \t, refundd Stanorius, has no more danger in it, than if I had told my Self I adored the lovely Elifinda. On hearing this, Stanijfa ftarted, exprefling a great Surprize: but he purCuing the Difcourfe, faid, I am the guilty ‘Offender, and thefe Gentlemen (putting into ‘her Hand a PurSe of a hundred Pieces) in-;treat you not only to splead to Elifinda for Pardon, but to tell her my ardent Love could know no reft ’till I fold her thus; and then embracing her in the moft paflionate manner, that fhe began to think him a Lover worthy of Elifinda, they foon perfeftly under-ftood each other. All fhe now ftagger’d at, was Reputation, and the fear of her being expos’d, which Stanorius dispers’d by bitter imprecations, wifhing he might be blafted with the Charader of Coward, and Fool, if he So much as whiSper’d it to the Winds : No, faid he, I adore her as much for the Excellency of her Underftanding, as all her other Charms; fhe has a refin’d Genius beyond her Sex, who, generally are Such Fools to give up every Pleafure for this one: She knows how to enjoy each, whilft, with inSulting Pride, fhe tyrannizes o’er the fond Girl, that perhaps for a Song, or the amorous NonSenSe
of
/
*Ihe Prude.
tjf
of a weII“drcSsM Beau has loft all the regular HappineSs of Life ; then She can tower it with the felf-denying Dames, who rail at others for that which with iuch difficulty they reftraia themfelves.
Confirm’d in her Opinion of his Secrecya fhe return’d to Elifinday to whom fhe related all that pafs’d,except the Purfe ,* which infpir’d her to fay fo much to his advantage, that EUjinda foon agreed to a Meeting, and a Day of Devotion was fet apart, which fhe went to perform with him, they liking each other fo well, that he continu’d her Lover till his Employment called him out of the Kingdom. He was the beft Gallant for Stamjfa that ever Elijinda had, j for his liberal Prefents, join’d with hers, made her a Fortune not inqonfide-rable. Stanorius, faithful to his Promife of Secrecy, after a whole Winter of Love, continu’d fo paffionateiy fond of EliJindUy that when fhe went to EmeltVSy which fhe con-ftantiy did every Summer, ftaying about three Months, he made a Vilit to the neareft Acquaintance he had in that part of the Country, which, tho’ full twenty miles diftant, he frequently rid it to and fro in a Night; fhe giving him a Key to the Garden-Door that was nigheft her Chamber, to which he mounted by a Ladder of Ropes. It’s certain ftolen Pleafures are the fweeteft, for had Elijinda been eafier of Accefs, fhe probably would have worn the Willow much fooner, as feveral beautifuller Ladies had done fucceffively before, by his inconftant Changing.
One Nieht. exoedin^ him. fhe retir’d
of pero? formin
Night, expecting earlier than ufual, under
E ■
him, pretence

16
The P
forming her Evening-Devotions. The Servant that was fent to the next Town to fetch the Letters from the Poll, happening to return later than ordinary, Emelia receiving one from Bellgrand, in which was fomething of Importance, that fhe imagin’d proper to acquaint Elifinda immediately with. She went to her Chamber-Door, where rapping pretty loud, Elifinda was forc’d to flip on her Night-Gown, and let her in j but the Confulion that appear’d in her Looks, for fear he fhould come in the mean time, caus’d Emelia to ask if fhe
was well.
fiaid Jh
made
beginning to hear the Noife he made in mounting, which fhe eafily diftinguifh’d, tho* too little for the other to perceive) for I dreamt Thieves were breaking into my Apartment when you wak’d me. She Spoke this in a very loud Accent,in hopes he would have heard her; but Stanorius was too intent on the pleafing BufineSs he came about to mind it, and throw-ing up the Safli, took Emelia about the Neck, (her Back being towards the Window) kiffing her with the eager Transports of a famifh’d Lover. Ac which Elifinda immediately fell a crying, Thieves !—Thieves ! —Murder
I----Stanorius preSently took the Hint,
and flung ^ himfelf down the Ladder, whilft Elifinda., in her great Fright, from the Window ;
Murder
ana
letting
pufh’d Emelia down the
Ladder, renew’d her Screams, by faying. Take the Ladder up ! Take it up ! He turn’d and obey’d her, immediately making off; fhe flill continu’d her Outcries, as if confus’d in her
Wits
that
in
fhe could
neither let the Servants in, nor tell them
what
The P
«	A
27
what the Matter was for a confiderable time, ftill roaring out, the Garden was full of arm'd Men. She Said fo on purpofd to have the Garden Search'd firft, knowing he would Soon get from thence, and whilft they were employ'd there, he might get off unperceiv’d.
The Servants having examin'd the Houfe, Gardens, and neareft Roads, without finding the leaft Track of Man or HorSe, imagin'd the Ladies out of their Senfes, or elfe had Seen a Spirit i tho' Emelia w'as convinc'd, by his manner of accofting her, it could not be the laft 5 which, join'd with every Circumftance, caus'd her Soon to gueSs what fort of Robbery he came on. Elifindd.s Confufion, her Dream, with her loud Relations of it, and what follow'd, occafion’d her calling to mind, that not long before a Countryman, going out early on his Morning-BufineSs, found a HorSe, with handSome Furniture, tied to a neighbouring Tree, and on Inquiry it was discover'd to be a Gentleman's at Some diftance,Sup-pos'd to be ftolen out of the Stables, and left there on Some occafion by the Thief,or perhaps a Fright, join'd with the Care EUfinda took to hold her So fall, that She could neither ftir to the Window nor the Door, while the Ser-vants ftrove in vain for Entrance ; all which Emelia put together, not at all to ElifmdcCs advantage, to whom She took no other Notice, than on hearing her People Say, What a happy EScape they had ! She anfwer'd. No, we prevented their Theft for this time. Which Expreflion, though it fiung Llifinda to the
She had too much Discretion to Seem
quick,
to underhand ,*
not but this Accident E 2
fo
alarm'd
z8
The P R u D E.
Stanijfc
let him know She could no longer receive his Midnight Vilits : on which he return’d to .Down, and fhe found in lefs than three Weeks a plaulible ExcuSe to follow him ; her Sifter Bellamira always flaying with Emeliay to whofe Wifdom Elijinda paid the Compliment of her improving more than with her-felf, though the real Motive was very different for the early Spring of that young Lady, promis’d too rich a Summer of Beauty for her to behold without Difcontent and Envy : She was not ignorant one tolerably handfome, accompany’d only with the Ugly or the Old, has fome Influence ; whilft fuch fuperiour Charms as BeUamird.*s muft needs eclipfe her inferiour ones, as fhe after found to her Coft.
Before the end of the next enfuing Winter Stamrius was called out of the Kingdom by his Employment, and Elijinda a Second time left, in a whdow’d State ,* the Succefs fhe hitherto had in concealing her Intrigues, made her more venturous, not that as fhe increas’d in Vice fhe did not pretend to do So in Vertue i and that excellent Satire which the ingenious Lord Rochejier writ many Years fince on a Lady of the fame %amp, may juftly be apply M to Elijinda*
So well the Spirit and the Elejh agy ee,
Luji and Devotion, Zeal and Letchery;
Of what important Ufe Religion’s made By thofe that wifely drive the cheating IJradel As Wines prohibited fecurely pafs.
Changing the Name of their own native Place,
' ' So
The is RU DE.
10
SO Vice grovts fafe, drefd.d in Devotion^s Name^ UnqueftioPd by the Cufiom-houfe of Fame.
Where-ever fo much SahBityyou fee^
Be more fujfkious of hid Villany :
Whofe-eveKs Zeal is than his Neighbours more^
If MaUf fuffeSi him Rogue; if Woman, W'
Her next Lover, for it would be endiels to relate all the Rencounters fhe and Sta-niffa had with accidental ones, was a broken Tradefman, the Excels ol whole Lewdnefs had ruinM his Fortune. I£ there be any thing in Sympathy, of which the Ingenious have writ fo many learned Volumes, it is certain fhe felt all its Power on the fight of Lhomafo, who happen’d to be talking to her Lace-man, as fhe pafs’d by in her Chariot; yet, in that flight view, he made too great an Impreffion for her to refill the new-born Defire fhe had to know him. She Hopp’d her Coach (perceiving he left the Perfon he was talking to, without minding her 0 and under pretence of having fome Lace fent to her, enquir’d who he was that then parted from him : But on hearing his wicked Cha-rader, fhe expreSs’d her Deteftation in fuch Terms, as could leave no fufpicion of her Inclinations. And having learnt as much of him as file wanted, foon went to the molt diftant Part of the Town from where fhe dwelt, in a Habit that fhew’d more of plain Plenty, than the Grandeur fhe liv’d in; fend* ing from a publickHoufe to fpeak with him, at firll pretending fome trifling Bufinefs, where fhe entertain’d him fo well, he was not long infenfible of her Meaning, the Quicknefs of his
Parts
20
The P
/
Parts lying chiefly that way; who was fb fuccefsful in the happy Art of pleafing her, that three whole Days and Nights were employ’d in Love, before they could refolve to part : all which time, Stanijfa was left to the care of amufing her People with her being out of town. At parting, fhe gave him a Purfe, in which was a liberal PreSent to his Wants i then fettling Affairs fo, as often to meet by appointment, ftill taking care to Supply him with juft enough to Support him, but nothing more j whilft the expectation of attaining to higher Pay, made him do Wonders in her Service.
One Evening, as they were a-bed, fhe happening to fall afleep, he Softly flip’d her Pockets from under the Pillow, where fhe always carefully laid them. The Motive which induc’d him to do it, was, to enquire the ftrength of her Purfe, that accordingly he might enlarge his Diftreffes; where he found, to his great Amazement, a Letter directed to Elijinday with the Copy of her An-fwer, in the Same hand fhe ufed to write to him; the light of which caus’d him to fancy his broken Fortune reftor’d with advantage, tho Experience convinc’d him otherwiSe. With great Caution he laid the Pockets from whence he took them, refolving certainly to know if fhe was really Elijinda, before he would discover his knowledge to her, till then never taking her for better than a rich Tradesman’s Wife, which fhe by a thousand Artifices had endeavour’d to make him beheve, enlarging on the Difficulties with
^	*	' which
Pru DE.

which She ftruggled to procure him fo much Money.
7'homafo did not reft after this Difcovery, till he eiiquirM what Church ftie uSed, it being impoflible for him to fee her in any other place j when he was foon convinc’d Eli--finda and his unknown Miftrefs were the fame: which put all his little Wits to work, to contrive how he Should acquaint her with his knowledge of it, being fenfible fhe would be irreconcilably angry w’ith him, fhould Ihe miftruft his prefuming to touch her Purfe; f6 great an Awe had the power of her Gold over him, contrary to the Nature of his Sex.
But in the midft of thefe Meditations, he was unhappily feizM by a Creditor, and clapt into Prifon, where he foon made a Confidant, to whom he imparted this Secret > it being often the nature of wifer People than himfelf, in deep Diftrefles, to lay open all their Affairs and Expectations, in hopes to find in others that lucky Advice they imagine themfelves incapable of. He was perfuaded, the fpeedieft way of redrefs would be to fend direCtly to Elijinda: And that the Reader may have a better Idea of this pious Lady’s Tafte in a Lover, the following Words are exaCtly the fame which he fent to her on this occafion.
Dear and HighlyAomttr*d Lady,
I Hope your charming, charitable Ladyfhip will pardon this Prefumption in your profound Adorer, for fending fo direClIy to your good Ladyfhip. My dtsiv Maranda, or rather, divine Elijinda, I have long con-
‘ ceal’d

‘ITje Prude.
cealM this plealing Secret in my Breaft, for fear of offending my lovely Cyprian Q.ueen,by letting her know herDivinity was reveal’d to her Adorer; which now, by an unhappy Embaraffment, I am forc’d to divulge to your fair Ladyfhip, becaufe I fear fo much time would elapfe, as might make an Eclat a-mongft my Ceditors, on hearing of my unfortunate Seizure, which happen’d Yefter-day exacUy at the Hour of One, fhould I have ftaid till I had let my dear Maranda know this cruel Difafter, which muft inevitably detain her dying Lover from her, with every tender extatick Rapture, which fhe can fo elegantly diftinguifh: Unlefs my fhining Maranda will ftir up in your Ladyfhip the remembrance of thofe thrilling Joys, which, I truft, will incline your Ladyfhip to pity this unhappy Cataftrophe in the State of,
%
Tour Conjlant^
And Pajjlonate Adorer^
T HO
M A S o.

P. S. The Debt is Thirty Pounds : Dear
‘ charitable Lady, don’t let me ftay a ‘ Moment after the receipt of this, but
*	confider my uneafy Languilhment, till
*	I fee your adorable Self.’
Had Elifmda been ftruck indeed with a Thunder-Bolt, fhe could not have been more ftupidly amaz’d, than for fome time fhe was on reading this Letter ; when a little recovered,'
finding
‘The Prude.
vered, fhe went immediately to her uSuai Oracle, to conSuIt what was to be done. Sta~ nijfa^ who was never pleaSed with this Intrigue, told her, fhe look’d on his her to be Elijinday as the moft unfortunate Accident that could befall her. YoUr Reputation, faid floe, now lies at the mercy of a needy Fool, whofe Vanity, you may depend on it, will expoSe you to the inferiour World of his Acquaintance,* and, if you do not fupply his Wants more largely than you have hitherto done, will do Some impudent thing to blaze you amongft thofe of your own Sphere. Elijlnda, extremely griev a and per-
reply’d. Reproaches are in vain, let with our bell Skill, to manage this which, whether it was owing to her Tendernefs for him, or her Fear, fhe was for having done by gentle Means. Stanijfa violently oppos’d her owning herSelf to him* After much debating, it was refolv’d Eli^nda Should order the Melfenger to be Sent for up, and Stanijfa representing her, anfwer him ; which ihe did, by telling the Bearer the Per-fon was either miftaken, or out of his Senfes ; tho, on hearing his unfortunate Circumftances, to Soften the Rigour of her other Treatment, fhe bellow’d a handfome Charity on him, ftill infilling on the Millake, tho fhe kept the Letter.
Phomafo^s high-flown Hopes were all dispers’d when the Melfenger return’d with this account: Sometimes he thought of flying our, and openly expofing her ; but there was Danger in this Attempt, befides it would get rto
piex’d, us try.
Affair:
F
Gold,
54
Hie Prude.
Gold, which was his only Aim. Howevefj before he could fix on what to do, Elijinda, never defigning to let him run to Extremes, went to the Houfe where they fhould have met by appointment, had not this Accident happen’d to him; and, Shewing a very great Uneafinefs at his not coming, Sent to enquire for him, where fhe imagin’d fooneft to hear of his Misfortune j which having learnt, fhe immediately difpatchM a Letter to him, bemoaning, in very tender Terms, his unhappy Fortune, promifing all her Affiftance, at the fame time complaining how little was in her power, tho’ nothing fhe could do fhould be wanting.
This Surpriz’d Thomajo to Such adegree,that he doubted his Eyes, and all his Senfes; not but it convinc’d him, to continue his knowledge of Elijinday would lofe him the Friendship of Maranda, whofe Favours he was forc’d to receive, as She was pleas’d to bellow ’em, in the defperate State he was at prefent. After She had amus’d him for above twenty DayS-with Hopes and Fears, with much pretended difficulty She at lafl releas’d him, on condition he would quit the Kingdom j with an additional Sum which She gave him, that She might have time to recruit this extreme Expence, as She Said, before he went. She took her leave of him, without Seeming to have the lead knowledge of the Letter Sent to EJifinda; which he, for fear of giving offence, made no mention of. They parted from each other with all the tender Endearments ufual between the fondefl Lovers j
Sta--
The P R u D E.

Stanijfay in her great Regard, Seeing him Safe on board.
Th is happen’d nigh the time when Emelia and Bellantira came to town to ftay the Sea-fon, Emelia s regard for that young Lady having drawn her thither, which fhe had'not been nieh for fifteen Months before; and if the Adventure or Polonius made any Impref-fion on them, in relation to Lyfander, it had more powerful EfSeds on Elijlnda^ on his own fcore, who was So extremely charm’d with his agreeable Confidence, as fhe term’d it, that no reSpedt to her idol Reputation could in the leaft refill her impetuous Inclination. Stanijfa^ violently againft it, laid open to her, in vain, all the Difficulties: He will infallibly know you, faid that fubtle Woman'y and, with pride, blaze fuch a Conqueft, by which you will fall beneath the moll deSpicable of thofe Follies you have treated with fo fevere a Contempt in others. But Elijinda, who had as exquifite a Tafte of Variety as any of the gay Beau Monde Sparks, cry’d. Let me but polfefs him once, and I fhall be fatisfy’d : Is there no contrivance for that once ? Stanijfa perceiving it in vain to oppoSe her, Set her working Brains to find the fecureft Means ; at length, hitting on the lucky Opportunity, the Mafyuerade, they refolved to make that the Place of Encounter ; not but the Defign was at firft a little dampt, by the Ladies intending to be there, as has been mention’d before i which they foon got over, by concluding in fo vail a Crowd, affifted by her Dif-uiie, it would be impoffible for her to b^
F 2
LToe Prude.
diftinguifh’d. Thus full of their Defign, on the Day fix’d for the Maf^uerade, immediately after dinner, they retir’d to Elijindd.s Country Seat i where, being arriv’d. Orders were given to be deny’d to all Vifiters: and a Maid, that by this time was let into part of the Secret, was left to amuSe the Servants with their being only with-drawn to their Chambers for that Evening ; when, in another Prefs, they flip’d out at the back Door, returning to town in a Hack, to a Houfe She |tept for thefe Defigns.
Where, whilfl: EUJlnda was employ’d iii diSguifing herSelf with all the advantage that Art or Fancy could invent, to charm the Eyes and Heart of him that daily wanton’d amidft the fele^S Beauties of a whole Nation, Stanijfa w'as bulled with the care of deliver^ jng Polomui a Letter. In a Hack, fhe went dire<5lly to the Place where he dwelt; which, admitting neither Mafqne nor Porters to enter, oblig’d her to enquire without, where poffibly he could be found. The PerSon thfen ^n waiting, to whom (he happen’d to apply, being better acquainted with his Clothes than his Perfon, told her, that, not three Minutes fince, he faw' him go out of a Coach into a Houfe he pointed her to.
On hearing this, fhe order’d to be drove fo nigh to the Place, that fhe fancy’d (he Saw him through the Window j and, pleasM with fo Incky an Opportunity of meeting him, immediately Sent in EIiJindVs Letter, with a Prefent; and, without Haying for an
flew to her with the fuccefsful News
of
Fhe Prude.
37
of having deliver’d it as Ihe imagin’d. But, by an unhappy Miftake for the pious Dame, it vi^as Lyfander that receiv’d it, who happen’d to be drefs’d in a rich Habit, for the Mafquerade, of the fame Colour which Polo-nius^s Clothes were of, that he had on that Day: and, by an odd Chance, whilft the Milliner was mixing Ribbands and Feathers fuitable to his Drefs,. he came to this Houfe to call on a Friend that intended to accompany him to the Mask,' ordering the Milliner to fend the things after him. And if his Drefs occalion’d Sta-nijfd.s Miftake, the Prefent which EUfinda fent with the Letter, to prevent Polonius from taking her for a common Intriguer, caus’d Lyfander to open the Letter, believing it fome trifling Diredion with the Feathers, where he found thefe words in French^ as nigh as the Tranflation can render them.
To the too Charming POLO NIUS.
PI T Y a Stranger, who has ftrove in
vain to guard the Accefles of her Heart againft your conquering Eyes, and every engaging Look. Sure Love has form’d you ail o’er for Delights, nor am I in-ienfible you are acquainted with all the various Joys that Deity can profufely be-, ftow; then refill not his Summons, who courts you ft ill to new Pleafures. Yes, Love conjures you to hafte away, the Vanquilh’d entreats you would diftinguilh
‘ her
€

Lhe P R u D E.
‘ her Conqueror at the Mafque to-night by ‘ this Trifle j which She dreSsM with plea-
*	fur?, in hopes to have it worn by the ‘ loveliefl; Youth that e’er adorn’d a Court;
*	where if you can permit a Stranger the leafl: ‘ Corner in your Heart, already environ’d by
*	the hoftile Fair, ftie’ll, unreflfting, yield to ! your vidorious Arms.’
Lyfander \mmed\att\yj on reading it, perceiv’d the Miftake, tho’too late to be re-dreSs’d, and, with a Curiofity peculiar to Youth in Love-Intrigues, began-to examine the Prefent, which prov’d a Cap fo richly adorn’d, as could not cofl: lefs than thirty Pieces. This rais’d in him an uncommon Defire to know the lavifh Donor, being fenfible it could come from none whofe. Fortune was not at leaft confiderable. This caus’d' him to wonder they would truft their Reputations with Poknius, which he refolv’d, by the Alliftance of the Cap, to reprefent j and making the ufual Excufe of Bufinefs to his Friend, which this Letter had given him notice of, left him ; a Second time changing his Habit for the Mafquerade, taking care, as nigh as poflible, to reSemble Polonius^ which was eaSy to be done, their Shape and Height being very like: which caus’d him to be late before he came to the Mask, where the only Objed that fix’d his Attention was	i Ariam having Shown
him her Drefs, by which he might know the other who was to be with her. But
he needed not to have had that Notice,
hi

P R U D E.'
39
his Eyes and Heart were too well acquainted with all her Charms, not eafily to di-ftinguifli her from the whole Company j who was drefsM like a Shepherdefs in a beautiful grafs-green Sattin, trim’d with Silver: The Sleeves and Shape being clofe. So exadly fitted her fine-turn’d Limbs, as fhew’d them a Ma-fterpiece of Nature’s Work. On her Head was fix’d a little green Hat Somewhat afide, the other part being Set out with Flowers, whilft her abundance of lovely light-brown Hair was ty’d back with Ribbands, the Ornaments and Taflels intermixing with it, which fell down low as her Waiil in a natural Ring; but the lelfer Curls by the help of gentle Zephyrs wanton’d on her Neck, too exquifitely for faint Description to give the leaft Idea of its unparallel’d Beauty. To all which Charms were join’d Such a refiftleSs Air and unafSeded Motion, that all the Company beheld her with a pleas’d Amazement ; whilft Lyfander, too well acquainted with the matchleSs Face the envious Mask conceal’d, gaz’d on her with a motion-leSs Surprize, the manner of her DreSs diScIo-fing ten thouSand Charms, which till then had paSs’d unheeded by even the Eyes of enquiring Love.
The Letter and Prefent were quite ba-nifh’d his Thoughts, wholly pofleSs’d by BeK lamira ^ nor was it poflible to refill: the Defire he had of ingaging that lovely Maid into a Conversation ; the fight of her uncommon Charms railing his Paflion to Such Height, he found Words yet form’d too poor to expreSs any part ot the paflionate tender Sentiments
of
40
of his Soul
And
P R U D £.
approaching her with a trembling cautious Refpeft, which he ftrove to mix with an Air of Gallantry, faid. Madam, your Appearance is too Celeftial not to create a Delire in a prefumptuous Mortal to intreat you would let him know by the Name of what Deity he ought to addrefs to you his humble Adorations.
I am a fimple Shepherdefs, that tend a few harmlefs Sheep, reply'd Bellamira \ and as fuch you treat me, to imagine I have the Folly to hear a Compliment So like Ridicule, without a Frown. How can the lovelieft of her Sex, Slince you are a Mortal) anfwe/d Lyfunder, be fo cruel to think that any who behold the matchlefs Wonders of your Beauty, would treat you with, aught but the Softeft, tendered: Transports of refpedful Love ? Bellamira, Surpriz’d aC the paffionate manner with which he utter’d theSe Words, Said, You talk of Love with too much Skill for a filly Shepherdefs to underhand you. No, reply d Lyfunder, (Seizing her gently by her Garments, as She was withdrawing from him) you have made me too fenfible how little Skill I have, that cannot perfuade you even to hear the humbleft Ad-drefSes of a Heart, however you uSe it, as inevitably fix’d to your every Perfedion, as the Loadllone is to its known Pole. Perhaps, Madam, continud he, perceiving her uneafy. Fate may never give me another happy Moment to Speak the Anguifh of my Soul; but where-ever I carry this wretched Load of Earth, no Tinie, no Place can raSe your lovely Idea from
my
The P
41
. my Breaft ; it’s too ftrongly imprinted there, for aught but Death to efface.
Scarce did She hear him out, when turning from him with an Air of ColdneSs, faid. This is too particular to divert; leaving him con-fcious he had too foon difcover’d his too violent Pallion. Amid ft ten thouSand tormenting Thoughts on her Ufage, and how to recover a farther Conversation, he found him-felf pluck’d by the Sleeve ; and turning, perceiv’d it was done by a Lady richly drefs’d.
with an agreeable Air, fedly white.
and a Neck per-
on which were difpos’d, m eaSy Order, TrefTes of dark-brown Hair. She fpoke to him in French, which he ealily diftinguifh’d, had not the Accent of a Native, faying, Are you not too thoughtful to Suffer Company }
Lyfander, who prefently refledled that this Lady muft be the Donor of the extraordinary Cap, reply’d, Madam, I wiSh you would be fo obliging to convince yourfelf of the contrary. What I do, reajfum'd {he, is in mere Compaffion ; for, methought, you appearM too' fenfibly touch’d at that hand-Some Shepherdefs’s leaving you, and am come to tell you from the Deftinies, that no friendly Star will affift you there, but eternally will meet with Oppofition from a malicious Female Planet.
I begin to be of your Opinion, reply’d Iyfander, only with this Difference, that I think you fairer than it is poftible for you to be malicious. To which the Lady made
Such advancing Replies,'that he was prefentr
G	iy

The P
RUDE.
ly convinc’d this wa^ the Lady to whom he Should -ad the Perfon and languilhing Air of Polonius; which he did in Such lively Terms, that their Conversation was Soon wound up to Such a height of Obfcenenefs, as caus’d Lyfunder to think her too well experienc’d
but a common Praditioner; and
have quitted her, had he there
not
was Something in the
And tho’
not a Stranger to.
for any fooner would often fancy’d Tone he was th is Curiolity detain’d him longer with her than any Inclination, yet he often anfwer’d her confus’d, his Heart and Eyes being imploy’d in looking after Bellamira, who was attack’d by a Perfon that feemed to make her uneafy j and exprefling by many Geftures her Diflike, Ihe at laft fled to Emelia for Refuge, who
for Refuge, and Ariana thither:
accompany’d her which the Ladv. that
entertain’d him,
Lady,
taking notice of. Said,
It
is but a falfe Fire you exprefs to me, all your real Love is for that Idiot Shepherdefs. Too much out of humour to be on her
guard, fhe Spoke this in her own Voice, especially at the Conclufion,
knew to be
immediately
his
turning nis Eyes on her, rrom i:ieaa to Foot, discover’d her Height, her Shape, her Mien, all but her dark-brown Hair, which he was not ignorant fhe might be beholden to her Tire-Woman for.
It was Some time before he could do any thing but look at her, which the more he did, the more he was Satisfy’d it was indeed the pious Eljfinda, What were his Thoughts,
in
which Lyfander Elijinda*s j and from
Head
The J*RUDE
45
m thofe Moments, of her excelling Devotions and Superiour Vertues ? By degrees he recover^ himSelf enough to renew the DiS-eourfe, by telling her. There appear’d So obliging a Jealoufy in her laft words, that he was ready to put himSelf in her power, and let her uSe what Means She pleas’d, to be SatisSy’d how much he prefer’d the Sprightly Joys She could give, to thofe of a filly Girl.
This reftor’d her to So good a Humour, that they immediately began to treat j and, without much Ceremony, a Hackney-Coach was concluded t6 be the Scene of Adtion, on condition he would reServe the feeing her Face to the next Meeting : which, faid fhe^ I conceal now only to have ftill Something new to entertain you with.
Lyfander, who had carry’d this Affair to as great a height as he defir’d, violently oppos’d that Article, believing it the only way to efcape her, the Sifter of Bellamira being the laft Perfon he was willing to enter into Such a fort of Amity with. Befides, Ladies, of her coming Strain rather damp than add Fuel to the Fire.
He was not long perplex’d with the Difficulties of handfomely avoiding her, when there happen’d an Accident that effedually did it; for the Perfon who engag’d Bella-mira, who fhunn’d him with a Diflike equal to his Defire of purfuing her, began rudely to prefs the feeing her Face, in the ufual Fool’s Cant, of / kmii) you^ and Ton need not affeB this Coynefs to an old Acquain-
G %	tame;

44
The Prude.
tance; which fhe anSwering with a fcofli-ful Refentment, he infolently offer’d to force her Mask of; when Lyfander, whofe Eyes were perpetually on her, perceiving it, immediately flew between them, telling the infolent Ofender, that was not a Place to take fuch Liberty in.
The Perfon, heated with Wine, which, poflible, added to his natural Soldnefs, replyM, And who are you that pretend ro hinder me ? I am, anfwePd Lyfander, very ready to tell you if you’ll go hence, it not being my way to make Broils on purpofe to frighten Women with the Pretences of Valour. The Company interpofing, foon parted them ; in the Rencounter, Lyfande/s Vizard fell off, and Several knew the other to be Polonius, who was forc’d, by the Command of his Friends, the next day to ask pardon, imputing his IndiScretion to the Excefs of Wine he had been drinking.
Whilff Elijinda^ flaying where Lyfander had left her, faw, to her inexpreflible Grief and Confufion, all that paSs’d between them ; had the Devil, in reality, appear’d with faucer Eyes and Claws, it could not have rais’d a greater Terror in her Soul than finding it was Lyfander who wore her Pre-fent, and whom fhe had entertain’d in fuch a way. Soon' as the Quarrel was appeas’d, too much terrify’d with the Thoughts of him to have the leaft Defign left on Polonius^ fhe convey’d herfelf out of the Mafque, and return’d to Stanijfa, where the Shame and Fear of being difcover’d, join’d to her Difappoint-
ment.

Fhe P R U D E.
ft
ment, cauSed her to rage beyond any Description of the Furies ; She tore her Hair and wrung her Hands, calling Stanijfa betraying Slut, and all the defpicable Names her Paffion could invent; and So great a Quarrel aroSe between them, how poflibly the Letter could fall into Lyfander*s hands, that from Words they came to Blows : tho* neither of their Wit or Skill could fix on any thing, but that it was no Contrivance between them, by what afterwards fell out; nor could She help reSenting extreamly, as She ftilM it, the Sawcy Negled with which he treated her, tho’ Stanijfa ftrove by that to perSuade her he did not know her.
The Ladies whom we left at the Mafyuerade, not a little frighten’d with what befel Bellas mira, immediately withdrew under the Care of Lyfander j who proud and pleaSed with his Charge, condud;ed them Safe home, where Emelia^ in very obliging Terms, return’d him Thanks for Bellamira, expreffing a great Concern for fear of a (parrel, alTuring him of Bellgrnnd^s Intereft to make Po/oizm Senfible of his Error. Which Lyfander anfWer’d with ^ Gallantry Suitable to the Occafion ; but Bella-mtra^ on whom the DiScourSe at the MaSque, and his Succeeding Adion in her Defence, be* gan to make Some Imprefiion, Said to him, as he proteded her through the Croud to her Coach, I think Ayfad.der,l^m to be eternally indebted to you for Saving me from the lnfolence of Polonius. What I have now done, reply*d he^ was only due to your Birth and Sex; but were it in my power, my Heart, and all the Adions
of
\6
The P
of my Life (hould convince you there is no danger or difficulty I would not with plea-fure encounter to Serve you. Bellamira could make no Reply, the Ladies were So nigh ; but neither her Looks, or Exprefiions, fhow’d any ReSentment, nor much Encouragement 5 not but from that moment She look’d on him as a dangerous Lover, from whom, if poflible, fhe refolv’d to guard her Heart; for befides her own Inclinations, which were partial to his Perfe(5Hons, the reSped She had for Emslias Judgment, cauSed her to think he deServed her in all Things but Fortune, which was far beneath her Birth and Expedations; yet for all that, when fhe did not lay a Reftraint on herSelf, and call the Thoughts of his inferior Circumftances to her aid, fhe found fhe was too favourably inclined to think of him, which with a modeft Referve fhe ftrove to conceal.
Lyfander on the other fide had the melancholy Thoughts, that he knew not to what all this tended, not having one Hope that could reach So high as the obtaining her in Marriage, and all other Views were impoflible. Befides, his Love was mix’d with too much Honour, and tender Ref^eft, to have a Thought he imagined would offend or hurt her, not buc the late Carriage of Elifinda^ feem’d a Contra-didion to all pretences of Virtue : the Reflexion of which So Surprized and ftartled him, that had he Seen an Angel adorn’d with all the glorious Rays of celeftial Light, transform’d in a Moment to the uglieft foulelt Fiend, it could not have fill’d him with greater
Horror;
Fhe Prude.
47
Horror, fo much more odious is the Difco-very of Vice when hid by fo fair a Semblance of Virtue. However, he reSpIvM to conceal his Knowledge of it not only from the World, but Llijinda herfelf; not that he trembled at her Threats pronounced under the Title of a malicious Female Planet, which tho’ defignM againft Polvnius, he did not que-ftion would be fully executed againft Lyfan-der. Nor was he miftaken, for fhe had conceiv’d fo great a Hatred to him, for his Neg-led and Infenlibility to all her profer’d Love, join’d with the fear of his having discover’d her, that fhe raved with all the Grief, DeSpair, and Pride of an infernal Fiend. Sometimes fhe fancied fhe heard him expoling her to Emelia^ and painted in her Mind all the ftinging Refledion which muft naturally fall on Such a Difcovery of her detefted Hypocrify, Sta'-niJJaj who now with difficulty was heard, ftrove in vain to pacify her, by telling her Should fhe be fo unhappy as to be known to him, it was a greater Efcape than the putting herfelf in PohmuPs power, which nothing would have reftrainM, while the other will be iilent out of his Principles of Honour, by which I know, faid fhe^ he is ftrongly guided, unlefs he has a defign to make a Merit to you in concealing this important Secret,* by which means, perhaps, he may have hope to gain your Affiftance in the obtaining Bellamira^ with whom, if I miftake not, he is violently in lov^. That is plain, anfaje/id Elifinda. But, continued/he, that odious Creature Shall know to his .poll I \^'il| revenge the Contempt with which
he
A'
Prude.
he treated me, by blafting all his romantick Hopes on that unthinking Idiot. When the Violence of her Paffion was Somewhat abated, Stanijfa perfuaded her to found Lyfander, who was above Such mean Artifices as the bafe 'Turn of their Mind caufed them to expeft from others ; and by generoufly concealing the Knowledge from her, laid himfelf open to her implacable Malice.
It was three Days before they returnM to Town, where the Ladies acquainted her with the Adventures of the MaSque, and what happen^’d to Bedamira ; On which finda^ with her uSual ReServedneSs, Said, Would it not have been much happier, if, like me, you had refrain’d from theSe idle Diverfions, and prevented the Noife and Scandal that it muft needs make, and, perhaps, have it Said, that Such an infignificant Perfon as Lyfander was in love with you} Emelian flung at this DifcourSe, as thinking it aim’d at her Condud, who not only favour’d Bel-lamiYOIs goingj but went herfelf; (She being one who, judging rationally, knew, too much Reftraint oftener caufes Youth to fly out and take Liberties unknown, more to their Prejudice, than it’s poflible for them when guarded by the PreSence of fuch as herfelf) anfwer’d
That Lyfander was too intimate a Friend to Bellgrand to create any Sufpicion on
his fide, and Bellamirars Condud was un-queftion’d.
She had juft ended thefe words, when Lyfander enterM/ to whom Elifindct addrefs’d herfelf with a more obliging Air of Freedom
than
‘The P R U D E ;

than ufual in her.
Lyfander, I
been hearing the frefh Obligations which; alt of us have to you, in putting a Hop to the Ill-Manners of Poloniusand after hearing a little more of the paft Adions of the Mafque repeated, askM him. How the Lady he entertain’d, took his deferting her, to render Bellamira that piece of Service, who, by the Description of her Drefs, muft be a Perfoti of Diftinftion. Lyfander prepar’d for this Encounter,'anfwer’d her courteously. He believ’d, indeed by her Converfation fhe had been di-ftinguilh’d more than was to the advantage^ of her Reputation, not but her Perfon was
very agreeable.
He Spoke this with So perfe61:
Elijiyida
had not the leaft Notion of its being her j by which She thought She was at liberty fully tq revenge his infolent Negled of her.
Nor was She long without the Opportunity^ an Incident happening that deftroy’d all the Scenes Lyfander had laid to eftabliSh a Friendship with that Family; The Marriage between Bellgrand and Ariana had hitherto gohe on with Such Succefs, as if it were not in the power of Fortune to prevent it: But that fickle Goddefs now thought it time to Shew a little of her Inftability ; for one Morning,before Bellgrand had quitted his Chamber^ a Letter was brought him up, which prov’d a Challenge from a Gentleman, named Ho«o-y/«r,who claim’d Ariana oy a Pre-contraft, demanding of Bellgrand either to refign her, or give him the Satisfaction of a Gentleman •, ending the Letter with menacing that noReftrainc
H	"
.. t. *•
FTje Prude.
fhould oppofe his Revenge, if refufed both. Bdlgrand^ who was inclined to do neither,was fo alarm’d with the Conciufion, that the Blood ran cold to his Heart, and PaleneSs covering his Face, as if Honorius, with Death, had already been there j i which Elifinda^ who was in the Chamber, perceiving, prefs’d to know what it was that had cauSed fo great a change in his Looks. He immediately acquainted her, confulting what he jfhould do, being confci-ous the Figure Honorius XaLtdy made, claimed, according to the general Opinion, the Satif-fadion he requir’d, or to refign Ariana j and ihe happen’d to be too agreeable and too great a Fortune for him ealily to part with, and Fighting was wliat he cared lefs for: All which Elijlnda perceiving, whofe Pride made her careful for the Honour and Intereft of her Family, was as unwilling as he to part with Ari” anas Fortune, tho Ihe did not Spare to lafh her Severely on this occalion ; nor was She leSs concern’d how to evade the Scandal of his refilling Amorim : And having already form’d a confuSed ^Scheme in her Subtile Brains, only wanted Stanijfa to contrive the putting it in pradice. She bid Bellgrand anSwer the Challenge, appointing the Time as far diftant as the nature of Such a thing could bear, aSfuring him She would prevent their Meeting, tho She would not let him into her Defign, faymgy It, might be inconlillent with his Honour to know it j which. Heaven is my WitneSs, added fhe^ I do to prevent the Crime of Murder, which would fill me with a double Horror, to have
any of my Family fiain’d with it.
Ending
with
The P

yr
with this pious Speech the Conversation, She withdrew to Stanijfay to confult the putting in execution her Defign j having remember’d that not long Since, She had told her a Relation of hers was like to Suffer very much by trufting lIomrius^ he having laid down his Equipage^ and withdrawn from the troublefome Dun of his Creditors. This Elijinda laying hold on. Sent Staniffa to buy the Debt in the Name of a PerSon unknown to their Family, and at the very Place defign’d for the Rencounter, as the greater Affront, had him arrefted.
Never was any Dillradion equal to Horn* riufs on this unhappy Seizure, tho he did not fail to tell Bellgrandy not to think of efcaping, for were it a thouSand Years, his Revenge would ft ill be alive to purSue him j who now Smiled at his Threat: For tho he had not Malice, or Skill enough to put this in pradice, yet applauded it done j not at all believing himSelf obliged to wait the LeiSure of the Unfortunate. Whilft HonoYius, doubly oppreSsM by Love and Fortune, as Soon as he could compoSe himSelf to think at all. Sent for Lyfander^ (whom from his Childhood he had been intimately acquainted with) and in the moft moving terms related his Misfortune, and the Falfliood of Art ana ; affuringhim they had long fince been Solemnly contraded to each other, tho, continued he, it’s now above a Month fince I either could receive a Line, or obtain the leaft AnSwer to any of my prefling Intreaties, which I imaginM was only owing to foine Humour : till going to my Lawyer afcut BufineSs, which he excus’d the not having done, by informing me of the hur-
H s	ry
I
Prude.
ry he was in to draw up the Writings for this Marriage, it was fome time before I could believe him, till he gave but too convincing Proofs. Heave you to judge, purfud the unfortunate Homrim, what muft be the tormenting State of my Soul, who cannot tear her from my Heart, falfe and unworthy as flie is I kno.\y, added he^ it is a Weaknefs below the fondeft Folly in a Woman, but I cannot help it ; in vain do I ftruggle, fhe is riveted here, faid hej pointing to his Breafi^ too fall for aught but gloomy Shades of eternal Night to extin-
Here he ftop’d, as feeming to be too far o*er-charg’d with, Qrief and Shame to proceed; whilft Lyfander heard him with a generous Concern, as having been the ignorant Caufe of his Misfortune, not imagining in the leaft he had engaged fo deeply with that lovely Lady ; tho he was not without his Sufpicions, that formerly he made her fome Addrelfes, which he thought were ceas’d with his declining Cir-cumftances : To whom on this Occalion, he did not fail to offer all the Afliftance of a fin-cere Friendship, in w^hat concern’d his Love or Fortune. Which Homrius accepted, intreating him to try, if it was poffible to regain the Heart of that fickle Lady. Who readily comply’d, tho he very much doubted the fucceeding ; not being ignorant of her Turn of ,Temper, For never any of her inconftant Sex had fo great an Inclination to Coquetry as fhe. Nature having furnifh’d her with every agreeable Charm, fit to accomplish her always fuc-cefsful Mifchiefs; for befides a Perfon extremely Handfome, there was Something in her
Air
‘The P R U D E.
Air and Sprightly Eyes inexpreflibly inviting, to which was joinM a moft entertaining Wit, mix’d with So Soft a Flattery, as charm’d all who heard her, whilft fhe fill’d them with delightful Ideas of themSelves: But theSe in-gaging Humours would vary like Afrits faireft Days to cloudy Storms and chilling Winds, that the Lover, who one day was wrap’d in a thouSand pleafing Hopes, which file knew hpw modeftly to inlinuate, perhaps the enfuing -Morn found his warmeft TranSports blafted by Sullen Frowns, and So frozen a Negled:, as would drive out Love and his fiery Arrows, by uneaSy Doubts, and all the Damps t)f cold Defpair. But tho this USage had worn out the Conftancy of many an attempting HerOy yet Homrius^s fteady Love was proof againft every changing Humour; and indeed So violent was his Paflion for that lovely Inconftant, that it Seem’d deftin’d by irrefiftible Fare: he having, before he came acquainted with this Lady, an Eftate that amongll the higheft Rank of Mankind claim’d the Refped due to a Gentleman, which a cold Look from her w'ould make him lavifh out in rich Prefents,which for
that time obtain’d a favourable Reception,who
never expreSs’d the leaf! Hint or Defire to any Sort of Diverfion, let it be ever So Expenfive, that he did not So extravagantly heighten, as both Surpriz’d and charm’d her. Which fhe did not fail to return with the moft Solemn, endearing Affurances of her Affedion, till fhe found he was undone, and then by degrees grew cold ; and Bellgrand was too tempting a Bait for her Ambition, not to refolve intirely
to
54
The Prude.
to (hake off this generous, unhappy Lover, which fhe imaging fhe could with eafeaccom-plilh, being a perfect MiftreSs of her own Adions,, having no Mother, and a Father infinitely fond of fo engaging a Wit in an only Child, indulgM her in every thing Ihe feem’d to like.
When Lyfander told her of Homrim^s Misfortune, fhe heard him with the fame Indifference as if he had related a melancholy Story of fome Stranger ; which he perceiving with Indignation, endeavour’d to roufe her by putting her in mind, how fatal it might prove to her future Peace with BeUgrand; but it had no other effed, than after a little paufe, fhe refu-ming the Difcourfe, Said, Honorius has de-ceivM me, I always thought I was too Secure in his Love, ever to fuSped he would do any thing prejudicial to my Repofe or Honour.
Lyfandevy not a little amaz’d at her odd way of Reafoning, let fall fome Expreflions which fhew’d how much he thought her in the wrong, to have fo cruelly deluded him as fhe had done, and then imagine any Tendernefs or Refped could reftrain fo juft a ReSentment as was due to his Injuries. But that Lady by no Arguments could be brought in the leaft to feem to underftand Reafon, and only concluded all LyfandePs Difputes thus 5 That if the Return of/^OKonWs Prefents, or the Value, would be of any Service, fhe would render them back, on condition he would never fee, write, or fpeak to her more.
Which difmal Account of her Ingratitude i^nd F^lfhood, when Honorius heard from
Lyfander.
The P R u D Ei
55
Lyfander, he broke out into fuch violent Tranfports of Rage and Grief, as it wanted little of eternally depriving him of his Rea-fon : he raged, he Ilorm’d, he fwore, he rail’d, calling her ten thoufand times perfidious, deceiving, bafe, unworthy, all the Names his Anger could fuggeft : But in vain. Love was ftill predominant, that Soft Paffion had feized with all its Subtlety too Securely on his Heart, for any Injuries to raSe. Sometimes he vow’d to tear her from her Husband’s Arms, and commit unheard-of Murders, and then in the next Moment would entreat Lyfander to go again, and try if her fickle Heart was not by this time changed into more favourable Sentiments for him. I know, added he, her only fault is want of Steadinefs, and, perhaps, by this time, flie may repent, and return to her Faith, her Vows, and all herinchanting Ten-dernefles, by which flie has fubtily wound her-felf into my Heart, as fatal ever to be fever’d, as the Life-Blood that wantons in it. Lyfander^ who found all Perfualion of raifing up his Courage, ^nd firiving to forget her, of no effe^,’ promis’dthe next Morning a Second time to attack her more cloSely, which could not be done that Night, it was So late ; and the impatient Lover, to whom Ariana had made Soft Reft and HappineSs a Stranger, after revolving a thousand different diftrading Thoughts how to retrieve or bring back her Heart, at laft reSolv’d to fend her a Letter, and with the Impatience that attends a Mind raiSed in fuch an Uproar, unhing’d to all Reafon, he gave po-fitive Orders to the Bearer to deliver it if poffi-
ble.

5<^
Prude.
ble, and not return without ah Anfwer. Ac-cordingly the MelSenger carried it to Ariana^ who was in her Sweet Morning-Slumbers, with her Repofe little broke about him i and it happening to be the Day in‘which her Father had promised to meet Bellgrand to Sign the Marriage-Writings, he roSe Sooner than uSual, and accidentally being in a Parlour next the Hall, heard NoKor/«j’s MelSenger preSs very earneftly to have the Letter deliver’d,	Ananas
Maid refuSed to take j Saying, She wonder’d the Gentleman would be So troubleSome, knowing her Lady had long forbid her receiving any MelSages, or Letters from him. This rais’d a Curiofity in he Merchant to come out, and ask Some Queftions; and finding the Maid Surpriz’d, and\\T>uld fain evade and divert him, he took the Letter, and opening it, read the following Lines :
HO NO RITJS to the Perfidious
A R TANA
LT S A N D E R*s Surprizing Confirmation of your inhuman Inconftancy, has filled my Soul with every tormentingPaffion; Love, Anger, and Refentment, alternately prey on my vital Spirits, and will foon free you from the now hated lIonoriui ; yet e’er Diftradion, or more kind Death, divide me for ever from the falfeft of her Sex, I would fain know what ExcuSe your cruel Heart can find for driving the moft fincere and moft paffionate of Lovers thence. Ungrateful Maid ! take heed, be not tooafh; Repentance
The P
r*
n
%
pentance may come too late, reie(3: before you give your Self to Bellgrand: you are already mine by Solemn Contraft, and believe that e’er long the Guilt of your perjured Vows will embitter all your now promis’d Joys with him whom Adana muft needs be fenlible is too great an Admirer of himSelf to love her as I have done, who have given up every Joy and Hope in Life, and long, long delighted in nought but the Thoughts of her: This Arianahxxt too well knows, and yet She would meanly bribe.me, with the return of what was only valuable to me, be-caufe poSfelSed by her, to quit a Claim, which (falSe as you are) not all the inviting Charms of your varying Sex, attended with Wealth and Power, could create a Thought of religinng the leaft part of my Title, regi-fter’d in Heaven too Secure for her to tear from thence: Then think how often you have Sworn by that Power, that not even your Father, whoSe Anger you dread a-bove all things. Should hinder you from being eternally mine; think on your thouSand Soft endearing Vows, by which, with bitter Imprecations, you have curs’d that beauteous Frame, if e’er you proved falfe to me: Take heed, the avenging Powers may one day remember, when you’ll in vain turn thofe lovely Eyes to Heaven* for Con-folation. Peace, or Bldlings, whilft there lives on Earth So loft. So miferable a Wretch,
/
as your forfaken
HONORIUS.
%
i
P. s
\
Lhe P R U D F#

\
5 R S. Whatever regard my Love may'
‘ have to you, don't think but I will /	‘ w'rite my "Injuries in the Heart of
‘ that Robber, that Invader of my Right, ‘ BellgrandI
Le Merchant read this Letter with an A-ftonifhment natural to a Father, that never had fuSpeded his Daushter uuiltv of fuch
fuSpeded an Indifcretion.
The Confidence he. always had in her Conduct, causM him to leave her the entire MillreSs of her own Adions ; the oftner he look'd it o'er, the more he was incens'd againft her. As to Hcmrius,, whom he fcarce knew, though he reSented his De** lign on his Daughter without his Knowledge or Approbation, yet he could not help being a little touch'd with Companion for a Love fo violent, rpix'd with fo deep a Defpair.
Le Merchant was a plain Man, and all the Adions of his Life were accompany'd with Sincerity and Virtue : This caus'd him to dread, much more than Anana.^ the Vengeance with which Honerius threaten'd her Perjuries. What moft Surpriz’d him, was her Willing-nefs to marry Bellgrand; and yet having given the other fuch favourable Proofs of Love, as Oaths and Solemn Vows, at firll he thought to have vented all his Anger on his guilty Daughter ; but, on more calm Re-fiedion, he imagin'd he Should difcovef little Truth from her:-and Bnding L^fandefs Name mention’d in the Letter, he refblv'd from him to learn how far her Folly had
carry'd
Fhe Prude.
i9
carryM her in this Affair j and fending an Excufe to EellgranL went himSelf to Lyfan^ der, whom he conjur’d very earneftiy to acquaint him with all he knew concerning themi which the other did in Terms fo advantageous f<^r the unfortunate Lover, as caus’d the indulgent Father to fall into a Paflion, mix’d with as much Grief as Anger, faying. Is it poffible that what you tell me fliould be true ? that my Daughter fhould fo unworthily have contracted her-felf to an undone Man, who lays his Rum
and without Che becomes a
to her Charge,
Partner of his indigent Fortune, mull not only be efleerPd^ but be in reality the bafell of her Sex?
Lyfander, added he, who would be a Father ? I thought Ariana never would have given me Caufe of Grief or Difcontent / how has Che loff, in one moment, my Value, my Confidence, the fond Pleafure with which I flatter’d myfelf, fhe was Miftrefs? of too much Senfe to fall into thofe Follies, which 1 often found perplex’d other Parents ? What fhall I do, continu*d he, Homrius has already expos’d her to Bellgrand, and now if he accepts her, it will be only for her Fortune ; that gilded Bait once fecur’d, he may make this a Pretence to ufe her ill.
Very probable,	LySander, for how-
ever bufy I have been
/
Marriage,
in promoting that
yet, in Juftice now, I cannot think Ariana ought to proceed j befides, his Pretences are ftrong enough to create her a reat deal of Trouble, unlefs he can be pre-
I a	vailed
6o
The Prude.
vailed on to refign her, which I beliere im-poflible. And what, anfived.d Le Merchant An a Rage., does that extravagant Bankrupt hope Lll give my Confent, or Daughter, as a Recompence for the lavifli Follies with which he has inchanted her ?
Lyfander neard him without Interruption, till the firft Tranfport of his Paflion was a little abated ; and then reafl'uming the Dif-courfe. Said, I do not wonder, Monfieur Le Merchant^ that the Solidity of your Judgment, and the fteady Vertue by which you have fleer’d all your Adlions, Should be Shaken on ib emergent an Occalion as this, where paternal TPendernefs for an only Child oppofes all you can think or do in favour of an unhappy Man j but give me leave to Speak my Sentiments, who am dilinterefted, or, if Intereft could byafs me, it would be to accomplish the Marriage of Bellgrand.
; I cannot refledl on this Lady’s Solemnly deluding Hmorius into So deSperate a Ruin, that not only his paft but future Fortune, is jufl on the point of being cruelly wreck’d, by the faithlefs Hopes of her dilfembled Love At thefe Words, Le Merchant haftily interrupting him, Said, What are thoSe Hopes you mention, fo nigh being deftroy’d That of an Uncle, reply*d Lylander; who, hearing how wildly he has Squander’d his own Eftate on this fond Paffion, is refolv’d to prevent the uflng his in the fame manner, by cutting off the Intail, and is come to town to fettle it on a younger Brother of Honorius.
Her

Fhe Prude.
6r
Here Le Merchant enquiring the Value of the Eftate, and finding it confiderable, tho* not at all equal to his Daughter^’s, fell into a more particular Enquiry of his Temper, Principles, and Geniusall which Lyfander anSwerM, in a manner that fhew’d he inte-refted himSelf in the Misfortunes of this ill-ufed Lover, telling the Father they were ac-, quainted from their early Youth; where, on all Occafions, he fhew'd a much Sweeter Dif-pofition, than, moft of his Companions, and had a Wit diverting, without any Taint of Satyr : and though, on Several Occafions, he had given unqueftionable Proofs of his Courage, yet he always found him readier to receive, than give offence : And he was, added he, generous without Extravagance, till he
acquainted with your fair Daughter; but from that moment he metamorphoSed himSelf into every thing he thought would make him agreeable in the Eyes of that charming Lady; gay Equipage, Balls, and Entertainments went on in a Round of PleaSure. I often,. purfVd Lyfander, wonder’d at the Change, but never knew the caufe, till I heard it from himSelf in the wretched Place where he is ; and indeed were you now to behold the Change from the gayeft, the agree-ableft, and Sweeteft Temper to the racking DeSpair, the piercing Sorrow, and the moft forlorn Melancholy that e’er poIfeSs’d the Soul of Man; he talks, he raves, he thinks of nothing but Ariana: And So great a power, I fear, continud he. She has over his Spirits,
that her LoSs will depriv’’e him of his Rea-
Son.
\
6l
Fhe P R n n E.
fon. Le Merchanty who began to be mov’d at this Relation, Said, Let us talk no more, but go and See this unhappy Man: with which LyfandeVy with no little PieaSure, complyM.
They found him traverling his narrow Boundsj with the ReftlelTnefs ^ that attends an afllided Mind ,* though he was furpriz’dx to fee ArianVs Father, yet he was too much prefs’d by his Woes once to refled, whether he came, to compieat his Mifery, or caufe a more happy Turn in his Fate. Le Merchant accohed him whth a Softnefs not uSual in Fathers . on fuch Occafions j and faid. Sir, I find by this Letter, (which he held in his Hand) you have long had Defigns on my Daughtetj W'hich, I think, would have been very proper to have acquainted me with ; whoj you ought to have confider’d, • have a right to difpofe of her, and without whoSe ConSenc your Hopes were very ill grounded. Sir, rrpyd Honorius, had I had any other view, than obtaining the Heart of that too a-greeable Lady, I fhould have addrefs’d my-felf to you. I believe, refunid the Father, fomewhat qui£ky you expeded her Perfon,' and my Indulgence to follow this Heart with a Fortune. No, anfioed.d Honorius,'Heaven is my Witnefs, that whilft Fortune favour’d my Hopes, I often urged her to be mine, with-the leaft view of what might enfue :
I would not
out
But how, miserable as I am, have her abandon her Interefl: in you, becauSe cruel Fate ha^ deprived me of every Means, except my unbounded Love, to recompence the
ion. Why then, added he, am I angry
with
/
Fhe Prude*
.	. V	.
with her becauSe She is to be another’s ? Np*
continued he. whatever Anpuiftl I luffer for
^ <1 ' * ' 4 ^ "
her Lofs, in whom I have centered all and every Hope of Happinefs, let not your Dif-plealure fall on her on my unhappy'uccourt ; no, inconllant as fhe is, I cannot bear the Thought, that her gentle Nature fhould be rufiled by fo terrible an Afllidion as I know her Father’s Anger mull needs prove. How is it pollible fhe fhould bear it, Lur/ued he, when my rough Nature finks beneath the weight >
Here his Speech faulter’d, and he ftagger’d backwards into his Chair all o’er convuls’d with trembling Agonies, nothing being more delightful to Parents, than perceiving in o-thers the fame Tendernefs which they find in themfelves for their Children. That palHo-nate Care which the too generous Honorius qh-prefSed in perSuading Le Merchant not to pour the Effeds of his Anger on Ariana, wrought fo powerfully on the Mind of the Father, that he wanted little of declaring, fhe is yours with my All: However, he foftened hi^ Re-fentment, and in very obliging Terms, began to enquire into every Tranfadion that happened between them , which HonoFtus could not be prevail’d on to give him any Light into, until he had Hrft obtain’d a Promifc from Le Merchant not to be angry with his Daughter, nor upbraid her on his fcore for whatever was paft; and then (tho’ with much difficulty) by the PerSuafion of Lyfander, he put into his hands a Packet of Letters, and the Contrail he had receiv’d from her, at different
times.
<5a
The P
timp. The firft the Father look’d on was in theie Words:
JRIJNJ to HONORIUS-
N
OTHI N G could pleafe me more than your PreSent, except the Contrivance which you have laid for my feeing you to-night: As foon as Daddy is retired to his Chamber, I’ll fly to you j but don’t let the Italian Imp ling any more, her Eyes are too fine : methoughts whilll that inchanting Pipe of hers exerted all its Harmony, my
yet ISIicoline
to
Hohorius gaz’d too attentively, has offended neither. I
am juft going drefs, but have loiter’d the whole Morn with looking on the Nofegay you Sent, I like your Fancy prodigioufly 5 amidft the Flowers, the Pearls and Diamonds have a mighty agreeable Shake, and tremble like the Dew-drops on the gay Beauties of the Spring : I fhall wear your Prefent to-day, but fhan’t be able to look in the Glafs, without thinking on Homrius, which will make me melancholy till I fee you.
Adieu till Night.
ARI ANA.
On
dn>e PftUDE.
■ On reading the latter part of this Letter, Le Merchant. Said with Aftonifhment, Was it you that gave her that rich Nofegay, why this cunning, this deceiving, this covetous—I don't know what to call her, came with it to my Chamber, and exprefsM fo great a liking to it, that imagining it would vex her to be disappointed of it, I gave her fifty Pieces to purchaSe it, befides what fhe Said fhe would add out of her own Allowance. I remember well, anfwer*d LySander, I Saw Honorius pay four times that Sum, telling me .Ariana de-
fired him to buy it, becaufe his Skill in Jewels was Superior to hers. It’s true, anf^vj'^d Honor!us, but why Should we talk of could it become any one better than it her ? Le Merchant conxanxfmg to look on the Papers, read the following out aloud, as defiring to have Some Particulars explain^.
did
;;

JK IJ NA to the Faithlefs
HONORIUS.
F Showing an intolerable Uneafinefs, when' alarm d with the Fear of lofing what you only pretended to love, were Signs of your being violently touch’d with that PaflSon, no one has given greater Proofs that way than yourfelf; and yet Honorius thinks itinot-hing to fting me to the Heart, by careffing that. infipid Heap of Folly Lady M—-—all the time I was preSent. I defpife you more for your odious Fancy
K	in
66
‘The P R U D E.
in chufing her, led of me. I
//
than your infolent Neg-Jewels and Jointure has wrought this Change in your fickle Heart, Ariana may one day Seem as fair in your Judgment, as her comely Ladyfhip. I could tear my Eyes out for ihowing this Concern to him, who I am afraid, does not deferve it. Refolve never to fee her more, or believe I will Sooner drink Poifon than ever fee, or even think of, you again. Yet Sure Honorius cannot be falfe to his Ariana, though you are unpardonably to blame to vex me fo ; for how is it pofli-I)le for me to fee you look with calm In-it^idifference on her, who never entertaiiiM
*	a Thought of that fond Paflion but in your
*	favour. Send me word when I Shall fee
*	you by the Bearer, which muft be foon,
*	for I cannot be eafy till you convince me
*	no one has a Share in your Heart, but t your
A
R 1 A N A.
As foon as Le Merchant had finifb’d the reading of this Letter, he look’d on Hono-rius, as delirous to learn from him what was the Reafon that induc’d Ariana to ex-prefs fo much Unealinefs concerning Lady
M--------j but he was fo far from taking
any Notice, or even minding his Prefence, that on hearing this Letter, which reviv’d the Thoughts of too many paft agreeable Tranfadions, he broke into a Paflion, faying,
TheA
6y
ing, Is it poffible that Ihe, who IhowM fo tender a Concern, mix’d with fo many obliging Fears, on only an imaginary Jealou-fy, can now think I can bear to fee her another’s, without Torment that
feeling
every racking poflefs the infernal Fiends, and, like them, no Time, no Fate, can retrieve. Oh Ariana! continud he, what Difference is there between our Condud ? You but fhow’d your Difcontents to be redrefs’d, whilft my defpairing A nguifti is to be re-medilefs. Some little Concern, a few reluctant Tears, before you gave yourfelf for e-ver away, might have Soften’d the dread Anguifh of my Soul; but fo frozen an In-fenfibility Seizes on my Heart, cold as the Icicles of Death.
Had you. Said
Merchant
interrupting
him, any Defign on the Lady M ■	, which
the Influence -^of my Daughter caus’d you to rejed ? I know not well, anfwer’d this difiraBed Lover, what I delign’d j my Heart’s too full to utter aught wherein fhe is concern’d. Perhaps, refum*d Le Merchant, who found himfelf concerned in Honorius’s Difcon-tents, my Curiofity may not be to your disadvantage, and be pleas’d to refled it is Ari-ana*s Father you oblige.
To which he reply’d, I am not fo vaiti to imagine Monfieur Le Merchant would bc'-flow his Daughter on a miferable Undone j and nothing elfe, added he, can make me entertain a moment’s Thought of Eafe or Happinefs, till laid in my infenlible Grave : ^hither let Defpgir and every Torment join
R %	t®
P R U D E,
fend
to lena me, Difcontems which
and free
both from the
you
I unluckily have created between the bell of Fathers and a Daughter, who, however fhe may be to blame in W'hat relates to me, always regards you with a juft Duty and refpedful Love, due to your uncommon TenderneSs.
Here Lyfander put him in mind of Le. Merchants. Requeft. Homrius anfwering, Said, There is little more than what the Letter
4	•
mentions, only an Uncle, who, by Right of Birth, knowing me to be his Heir, threatens to dilinherit me, unlefs I make my Ad-
drelSes to Lady M-
W'ho happen’d.
among Some of my Relations, to Speak So favourably of me, as caus’d them to imagine Hopes of my SucceSs i which coming to my Uncle’s knowledge, he prefs’d me in fo violent a manner, that I could not tell well how to relift his Commands ; thougfe, alas 1 added he, ihey would have little avail’d, had not the charming Ariana, on pretence of taking fomethieg ill, refus’d to fee me for above a
in fpight of all my prefling Solli-
citations.
That, Sir, was the real Motive that caus’d me to feem to comply with my Uncle, and, after three or four Vilits, had the Honour to W'ait on her to the Play, accom-pany’d with fome of my Relations, and either by Defign or Accident Ariana w as in the next Box. The Prefence of a Coulin, who I knew would obferve,. on purpofe to acquaint my Uncle, caus’d me only to pay her the Complement of a diftant Bow, tho’ I never
'	laid
‘iTje Prude.
do
laid a greater Reftraint on mySelf than in that Space of Time, which SeemM tedious to me as Ages. What Effed it had on APtana^ the Letter Speaks, I never Saw her in So obliging a Humour as when we met j and to put me out of all future Pain, as She term^’d it. She then, as I thought, generoully con-traded herSelf to me in the manner you fee*
He had juft finiShM the laft words, deli-
s hand the Con-
trad,
Merchant
when his Uncle enter’d the Room.
The Anger that Sparkled in his Eyes, Spoke little Comfort to HomriuSy and without paying the Civility due to the Appearance of the Gentlemen on each lide of his Nephew, he Seated himSelf, and Shaking his Cane as much with Age as Paflion, Said, Well, I See you are caged at laft. Are theSe the fine Lodgings {looking round the Room) you intend to refide in this Summer, or, for the more Con-veniency of Air, perhaps you may take Tour o’er the Water.
a
Equipage, hum!
you may
Where is your gilded I fancy you would be
and take
glad to go home in my old Berlin^ a Dinner---------which, let me fee
not five
Years ago you Said look d like a black Waggon. Where are your Friends, which you uSed to Say ’twas a greater pleaSure to Serve than yourSelf? What are come of your MaSques, your Singers, your Entertainments ? —for, methinks, you look but melancholy.
I warrant inventing Some Machinery of C«-and Graces to divert
fids
your honourable
MiftreSs
70
The Prude.
Miftrefs^—•! have a ftrong fancy the Widow would now go down.
Honorius, without reply, let him run himfelf out of breath; but the Confulion that appear’d in his down-caft Looks, lufEciently fhew’d what an additional Weight thefe keen Reproaches were to the too many Woes that already prefs’d too violent, long to be Supported.
Le Merchanty who heard him wdth Some furprize, told him, he Suppos’d, tho by his juft Reproofs he would make his Nephew fenlible of his paft ill Conduift, he did not intend him this generous Vifit, but with a delign to make him eafy, of his preSent Inconveniency, at leaft.
To which the Uncle angrily anfwer’d, Not a Groat, not a Sous, except it were to buy
him a Halter.*”. No, added he, let’s See what
his MiftreSs will do, whoSe Frowns and Smiles to my knowledge he has dangled after thefe four Years. What, continued he, (applying himSelf to Homrius) I fuppoSe you are to be a
Penfioner-Lover when She is married to
✓
grand, and Supply the Husband’s place, when he is out of humour, or out of the way.
At this Homrius Hop’d him, and with Looks, which fhew’d how much he reSented his treating that Lady in So diSreSpeftful a manner. Said, Sir, Whatever liberty you take with me, be pleas’d to refled when you mention Ariana, you Speak of one whofe Virtue is pure as un-fullied Snow, and as free from taint as your Mother’s Shade.
This
Fhe Prude.
7E
This put the old Gentleman into fuch a Paffion, that he wanted little of ftriking him, had not Lyfander and Le Merchant interpofed. The latter, tho vexM at the Reflei5lion on his Daughter, could not help Smiling to fee whac a Rage the old Gentleman was in, about his Mother’s Ghoft. By degrees they Soften’d him to more Moderation, who entertain’d them with a tedious Complaint of his Nephew’s Faults, and particularly enlarg’d on his obfti-nate refuSal of the Widow Lady i nor did he Spare to magnify how SucceSsful a Sollicitor he had prov’d in inclining that Lady to favour him. Here Le Merchant took the opportunity of Saying, I affure you. Sir, there wants nothing but your having the fame favourable Thoughts for your Nephew you were wont, tQ match him more agreeably to his Inclination, and confiderably more to his advantage than with Lady M—, whoSe Eftate mull ceafe with herSelf; and, I believe, I may add, continued he,, far greater than he could expe6t, were the Eftate he has already Squander’d away, join’d with yours.
If the old Gentleman heard him with A-mazement, how delightfully Surpriz’d was J/o-norius, who ftay’d not for his Uncle’s Anfwer, but throwing himSelf at his Feet, Said, Now, Sir, exert all that is good and noble in you to draw a guilty Undone—from the extremeft Depth of human MiSery, to So exalted a Height of HappineSs, that I have not a WiSh, a Hope beyond it. Oh Sir, blame not, added he, my paft Ill-Condud, but think on the numberlefs Joys I fhall arrive at through you.----------1
know
72-
IShe P R tF i) E.
«	4	'
know the generous Le Merchant can mean no other than his lovely Daughter, when he talks of matching me agreeably to my Inclination. Oh 1 did you know her Worth, you would thinl( all your Eftate well beftow’d on only her, whofe very Foibles, cmunud this tranfported Lover^ have Charms furpaffing all the Perfections of her Sex. When fhe is obtain’d, I lhall Seek no other Delight, no other Joy ,* in having her, my Happinefs will be compleat. And, Oh believe me, who e’er would talVe the trueft Content, the moft exalted Bleiling of Life, it muft be in the foft Society of thofe we lote ! A Love infpir’d by ftronger Caufes than Reafon can account for ! And where can that Pailion meet with greater Approbation than in a Wife ? Law, Nature, and Heaven, not only approve, but give a Sandion to this Love. For this we are born, for this we hoard up Wealth ; then favour andaffift me in this one, this All of my Happinefs, and you Shall find this Extravagant, this Bankrupt, when he has obtain’d this Treafure, the only one his Soul feeks, turn Mifer, and gather immenfe Riches to preferve and guard my ChoSen, my Heart’s
Defire, Anannr--------Here the Palfions crowded
too thick for further Utterance, and unable longer to Support the Tumult they had rais'd W'ithin him, his Head fell negligently on his Uncle’s Knees, bedewing them with Tears which forcibly broke their Paflage front his Eyes.
If the old Gentleman felt his Heart relent at his Nephew’s fubmillive, palfionate Intreaties, much more did Le Merchant's, who fancied
P R U D E*
r
tied he Saw in Honorius all that he promis’d of the fond, the indulgent, and the induftrious Husband, bulled with a tender Care for both Ariana, and their fmiling Offspring: Herofe from his Seat, and taking the Uncle by tlie Hand, fajd, Sir, your Looks tell me you cannot long refill: your Nephew's juft Requeft^' then raiSe him to that Happinefs I think he deferves. My Daughter fhall be his, if you confirm it with your Approbation, and Eftate after your Death.
The Uncle was too well acquainted with Le Merchant's Charadler, not to be fenfible how very advantageous a Match it muft lieedsf be to Honorius^ whom he had ftill a Value for, in fpite of all his Wrangling, and very gladly gave into it; faying. Why now we talk with Senfe and Reafon. I am not againft my Nephew's being fond of his Wife, tho I did not like he fhould be fool’d by a Woman j and fince Monfieur Le Merchant has the gene-rofity to accept of you for his Son, my Con-fent and Afliftance fhall not be wanting in any thing that can make you happy.
After Ht^norius had exprefs’d his grateful Thanks in Tranfports of Joy to his Uncle and the genercus Father of Ariana, he withdrew a little to compofe himfelf, and recover the wild Disorders he was confcious he had Shewn bn fuch various Occafions. In the mean while, the Uncle and Father foon fettled Affairs to their Satisfaction : And whatever WeakneSs Some may efteem Le Merchant guilty of, in thus fondly complying with IIom-rius^s Love, who think there is no Happinefs
L	but
74
The P
/
but in vaft Polfellions, yet he had fo much Skill as not to part with the old Gentleman, till he had confirined under his Hand not only all he promisM, but every Acre he had, on Ilomrius after his Death. For which pur-poSe having freed the now happy Lover, they all went direftly to Le Merchant Sy where Dinner by this time waited their coming.
In the mean time, never did Morning pafs fo tedious as this to Art ana, the Humour of that Lady inclining her more to create Un-ealineSs in others than Suffer the lead: in her-felf. The Maid had acquainted her w'ith U Merchants taking Homriud.s Letter j this a-larm’d her with difquiets, which till then fhe had been a Stranger to, her Father’s Anger being the only thing fhe ever dreaded : On this Occalion, fhe thought fhe heard him Upbraid her with a Severity fhe was but too confcious fhe deferv’d. In vain did fhe rack her Wit in framing ExcuSes, they were all too weak to entertain a Hope of alfuaging a Wrath fhe trembled at the thoughts of. It was in thefe Moments fhe repented the having favour’d Honorius fo much, or ufed him fo very ill. Bellgrandy and every Idea of GreatnefsjWere quite expell’d by the terrible 'Apprehenlions of her Father’s Difpleafure. She wonder’d he flay’d out fo long, yet dreaded his coming home.
It w’as amidft thefe perplexing Fears, that
fhe perceiv’d, looking through a Window
which fronted the Street, Honorius and her
^ \
Father alight from their Coach, with Lyfander and the Uncle, whom fhe did not know. She
imme-
*rhe P R u D E.
immediately imaginM he had expos’d her, and was come to confront her this terrify’d her fo, that (he receiv’d them all o’er pale and trembling ; whilft Le Merchant entering the Room with the now happieft of Lovers, presented him to her with a Countenance fternly Sedate, telling her it was to Honorius’s Intreaties, (he owed his not ufing her in a much worSe way,--------who from this Mo-
ment, added he, you muft look on as your Husband ; and the only means you have to reconcile yourSelf to me, is to make him a-mends in the beft of Wives for the word of Miftreffes, and ftudy how to know your Duty to your Husband better than you have done to your Father.
Unable to bear his Look and Words, To full of a ReSentment fo different from that paternal Tendernefs with which he always met her, (he fell on her Knees without utter-ing a Word. But the fond Lover foon prevail’d on Le Merchant to raife her up, more tq her Peace and Satisfadion j who quickly left them together, returning to the Uncle and Lyfander, who ftay’d behind.
Honorius in Raptures told her all the happy TranSadions of that Morning, and (he was too perfedly Miftrefs of every infinuating Art, not eafily to calm the Doubts her Un-kindneSs had rais’d, nor was (he difpleas’d at his SucceSs : for tho Pride, Vanity, and Ambition, join’d with the dread of her Father’s DifpleaSure, caus’d her to ad fo falfe a Part, yet it is certain, if (he lov’d any thing befjdes herfelf, it was	on
h z	whom
P R U D te.
wlvom .{he had the good Fortune eeen after Marriage to maintain the fame Afeetidantj hot that file did hot ftretch hls Patience fornfetimes to the ntmoll extent. Which fhe Would then recall back with fb agrefeable a
mix’d with a thoufand Soothing
Charms peculiar to that Lady. Their Marriage Was deferM no longer than the next
and the difficulty of making an Apology'wais left to Iyfdndef,
-Thusdid the ftibrle	Contrivance
by a lucky turn of Fortune, ohce in favour of Merit, change jionorim from the mol): (deSpetate to the moft happy of Men j whilft it p'rbv’d quite-dtherwife with the Unfottunate LAandeYj who generoufly ftrove to make his Friend happy, by thus blafting all his hopes in	tho With no lefs paffipnate De-
fires tlran thofe which polSefsH the fond Horn-fius. SBdl^i’dnd hot only receiv’d his Apology COldJyj but eX-prefs’d an extreme Difcontent
Whom no Saidj had been the Uitire occafion of his proceeding fo far in
the Ihtereft and Refpedt he had
for him^ changfd to ill-natur’d Refledion, which the other perceiv d with a DiipleaSure equal to his Love. In vain did he fummoti Reafon and CoUmge to his Aid ; the more he ftrbve to repulfe that fond Paffipn by a hopelefs Perpair^ it ftill with more V^^iolence returned.
He quickly left Bellgrand j and almoft in-fenfibly to himfelf, went to	A-
artment, where that obliging Lady no boner caft her Eyes on him, but fhe began
^	' i
i I
1-
'The Prude.
to inquire of his Health, in a manner, that IhowM a more than common Concern for the Diforders in his Looks, which he ex-cufed as entirely owing to his Difcontent for Bellgrand.s unexpeded Difappointment, relating at large all Honorius*s Hiftory: oil which BeUamiray who was prefent, faid, You have given So handfome a Charader of the Lover, that I am almoft pleafed he has fuc-ceeded, whatever my Brother’s Difpleafure may be for the iofs of Arianay who I cannot help thinking, added was extremely to blame to give him fuch Encouragement, without her Father’s knowledge. Etnelia juft then happening to be at fome diftance giving Diredion to one of her Attendants^ Lyfander reply*dy The Fault was not her encouraging, but heir deceiving him j and yet purfu^ he, hoW happy fhould I be^ coUld I even obtain a little of that pleaftng Flattery to fOoth a DeSpair too exquilitely tormenting to be exprefs’d or thought. Oh ! added hey looking paffionately on hery How fmall a Trouble would a generous Pity coft you, and from how many painful Agcaiies woUld it free me, to think at leaft, whatever difference Fate has placed between uSj I was not defpis’d by the lovelieft of her Sex I
you in earneft, anfwer'd Bellamira, (^ the Blufhes o*er-fpr€ading her charming Eace^ my Pity would be of little ufe, if not attended with my Friends, which I believe Lyfander is too fenfible Will be impolEble ever
The Approach of Emelia prevented any further Converfation i who taking
A ^	.	, > ' ,	V	♦	f	m
'	notice
» 7
X
IN.
The r R u D E.
notice of the Confulion that appear’d in both their Looks, fome time kept her Eyes fteadily fix’d on Lyfander ; to whom (he faid, Now I perceive the force of Sympathy, I always imagining I only efteem’d you for your uncommon Merit j but this Moment I have found a more powerful Motive, you very much refembling a Perfon I once valued above all the World. She could not help ending thefe Words with a Sigh, as the Sequel of her Hiftory will fhow She had but too juft caufe.
To this .DifcourSe of Bmelia^ Bellafnlra anfwering, faid. How different are your Thoughts from mine, for I have often fancied Lyfander not unlike you ? Which obliging Conversation of the Ladies he return’d with a Refped that fhow’d how happy he thought himfelf in that generous Efteem, which	on all occafions expreSs’dfor
him, on whom now only his Hopes depended.
No fooner did he return home, but retiring to his Clofet, he there at large re-fleded on what had pafied. The Words of Bellamiray that her Pity would be of little ufe if not attended with her Friends, with the Blufhes that accompanied them, he fondly imagined fpoke in his favour i but then the cruel Conclufion, where fhe told him (he believed he was too fenfible it would be impollible ever to obtain, Seized him with Such an inexprellible Grief, as made him curSe his narrow Fortune whilft attended with Such ambitious Defires, meditating a
thouf^n4 extravagant S§hemes how to advance

Fhe P R u D E.
79
Vance a Fortune worthy her Acceptance. But that violent irreliftible Deity, Love, ftill overcoming every Obftacle calm Reafon op-pofed, he at length rallied up Courage e-nough CO refolve to write to Bellamira, flie being always Surrounded with too much Company hardly ever to obtain another Opportunity of Speaking to her ; and indeed So very difficult was it for him to give her the Letter, that he paid Emelia four or five Vi-fits before he could contrive to do it, as he thought, unperceiv’d: Tho’ he unfortunately found his Impatience was like to prove very fatal ; for Elijinda and Stanijfa being with Bellamiray who from the Window called them to fee a fine Equipage pafs by of their Acquaintance, and they going to a different Window than that She look’d out at, Lyfan-der being nigh her, in a low Voice faltering with Fear, Said, I conjure the beauteous Bellamira, if She has any of that tender Compaflion So lovely in her Sex, by the Power Slie adores, to receive and read this, (putting the Letter into her Hand) which She took, telling him he ask’d by too great a Power for her to refuSe his Requeft.
But juft as She was flipping it into her . Pocket, Elijinda^ whoSe Spite made her more intent on them, than the Equipage, happening to turn her Head, obServ’d Bella-mira's having the Letter; and as Soon as Lyfander was gone. She hinted it to Sta-nijfay who, under pretence of Settling her Clothes, took it out of her Pocket, whilfl the other held her in talk.
It
/
So
The r R u D E.

It wa? tiot long before the lovely Bella-mira retirM to her Chamber, impatient to read the Letter, favouring the agreeable Author much more than fhe ever intended to
M •	>
let him Icnow i but, on examining her Pockets, and miffing it, fhe quickly return’d where fhe left the Ladies, who were withdrawn, with as eager Defires to read it as fhe, though mov’d by very different Motives, leaving EmeUa alone. The amaz’d Concern Bellamiya fhew’d in Searching for Some* thing fhe feem’d to have loft, created a Curiofity in EmeUa to know what it w^as j which ftill increafing by the Vexation the other exprefs’d for the lofs of what fhe could not find; EmeUa, at length, preffing her in very obliging Terms to know what had caufed fo great an Uneafinefs, Bellamira Said, It is what I am extremely troubled at, becaufe, if it Should be found by any that are malicious, I Shall be thought culpable of a greater Indifcretion, than I am really guilty of.
Thefe Words making EmeUa much more importunate to be let into the Secret, and the other having an uncommon Confidence in her Indulgence, together with the fear it would come to her knowledge by other means, did not long keep her in fufpence, but own’d the Truth. On which EmeUa told her, fhe had for fome time fufpeded as much, with no Small Concern, being very much pleas’d it was gone no farther before She had acquainted her with h; For no other reafon, I affure you, Bellamira, added
/
\
The Prude. 8i
Jjoe, but that I may either be the means to reftore your Mind to its former Tranquillity, which I am a little fuSpicious Lyfunder has difturb’d, or perhaps find Ways to make you happy with him; who, though I love you as my Child, I cannot help thinking deferves you, were Fortune half as kind to him as Nature, who has been too lavifti of her Favours to him, for even the Frowns of the other fickle Deity to obfcure.
Though nothing could be more pleafing to Bellamira^ than Emelid.s fpeaking thus favourably of Lyfander ; yet, ftriving to dif-guife her Sentiments, fhe replyM, And do you. Madam, ever' think it poflible for Ly^ funder to arrive at a height of Fortune fit for me to hear his Addrefies, without be-* coming the Scorn and Jeft of all who Should be fenfible of my condefeending Love }
The Ingenuity of that young Gentleman feems to me, reply^d Emelia, to promiSe he may one day arrive at a Fortune worthy your acceptance ; But withal fhe added, I would not have you depend on Such uncertain Expedations, and give Hopes that may cruelly imbitter the lofs of you,
his other Views. If
pointed in leave this Affair
if difap
will
you
to me, I will either cure him by the hopelefs Impoflibility of ever obtaining you, or prompt him to Seek you by Methods which ought to be approved by
your Friends.--... You have, faid Bellamira,
already fhew’d fo generous an Indulgence to my Weaknefs, that I cannot help difeo-
to
vering
you
my Heart rather inclines M	so
8z
The Prude.
to wifli the laft ; and though I would not give him Hopes, I cannot be pleas’d with the thoughts that his Defpair fhould be fo extreme, as to cauSe my becomirxg entirely indifferent to him : not but fince you have been fo obliging to intereft yourfelf in this Affair, I promiSe to do nothing in favour of Lyfander, without yoUr Approbation, and fhall think myfelf happily Secure in your impartial WiSdom. I cannot fay, reply d Emelia, 1 find myfelf fo very impartial : However, I will try to make Reafon my Guide in whatever Shall relate to you two.
In the mean time, the Sentiments of
Elifinda
J
Joy to perufe th i’d thefe Words
f	•
LTSJNTiER to the Adorable
RELLJMIRJ.
a
€
€
EFORE
lovely
you turn your
Eyes on thefe prefumptuous Lines, Summon up all the Soft Compaflion of your Sex, and pardon at leaft this Confidence in him, whom your irrefiftible Charms have made compleatly miferable. In vain have I ftrove to Subdue a Paffion, too violently great longer to be oppos’d or ftifled. The tortur’d ,Wretch finds fome Eafe in his loud Complaints, though
Jiill continu’d on the RacL-'-little other
Hope of Redrefs has the unfortunate £)'-
fander
yet would feign tell the beau-
teous

€
C
The P
teous Bellamira
my humble, my ar-
Oh ! why Diftance ?
dent, my liiicere Adoration, has Fate caus’d So cruel a Why are you fo high, and I fo very
low-----lince amongft all your number-
leSs Admirers, none can ever love with
There bein
Paffion equal to mine.
Difficulties,
no
Dangers, no Difficulties, nor Tortures, which I would not fly to encounter with eager Joy, to gain even the plealing View or Poffibilicy of ever arriving- at fo glorious, fo great, fo exalted an Hap.r
pinefs.......But whither does my wild
fond Imagination carry me 1--------it’s already check’d-------------------------for, methinks, here I fee
f
you fhake your Head, and with a fcornful,
■------How vain^
impoffible is his every Thought --------------
J	--J	------ J
yet charming Smile, fay
is his every Hope ?
Oh Bellamira t
be not fo very cruel as to think it impoffible. You have fee;n, you have heard how the Charms of Ambition, mean when compar’d with yours, have often fired Mankind with a reftlefs Emulation, baffled by no Difficulty, till they had reach’d
an envied Height.—......- Oh then believe
Bellamira StS a facred Truth, I would do Ten Thoufand Thoufand Times more to gain but one enlivening Hope j yes. Madam, could I but once obtain the Hap-pinefs to know that Bellamira defpis’d me on no other Score but that of Fortune, I would foon pufli my Fate, to put an end by the eternal Shades of JJeath to this anxious Sufpence, or in
M
The Prude.
fome degree make my Self worthy to be for ever Beliamira’s paffionate Adorer j
L rSANDEK
Elifinda having read the Letter, with a fpiteful Smile, Said to StaniIfa, Now, if I miftake not, I have an Opportunity to repay, with Intereft, LyfandePs infolent Neg-led:; nor fhall he, added fhe, have even the PleaSure of feedi ng this exalted Flame with empty Hopes. I will put a flop to all his romantick Platonick Adorations, which, I fuppofe, his dreaming Paffion has polSefsM him with. She failed not to execute that moment what fhe threaten’d, carrying it to BeVgrand, and after fome grave Reflections on the Inconveniency of being too famb liar with one’s Inferiours, fhe defir’d him to fpeak to Emelia about it, without taking any Notice of her difcovering it, but as if dropp’d by Bellamira. in going to her Chamber.
Bellgrand, complying with his Sifter’s Advice, acquainted Emelia^ in very haughty Terms, with the prefumptuous Defigns of that inconfiderable Fellow, as he was pleas’d to ftile him. Emelia^ arm’d for this Encounter, told him, Bellamira had already in^ form’d her of his Addrefs, and that fhe intended to fend for Lyfander, and make him fenfible of his Error and her Difpleafure. To which fhe added. That for fear of any other ill Confeqqencc, fhe intended to return
into

Ti'/e Prude.
into the Country with Bellamira within a Week. BeVgrand fully fatisfyM with what Emelia Said (he defign’d, left the reproving of Lyfander to her, to whom he always paid a complaifant Regard, having Secret Views of her Eftate for himfelf and Bellamira.
Emelia accordingly Sent for Lyfander, who waited on her, alarmM with Fears, that fbo foon prove Certaintys. She receiving him in her Dreffing-Room as the moft private, and accofting him with his Letter in her Hand, told him, it was immediately mifsM by Bellamira, and how foon her Brother had it; who, faid {he, has left me to acquaint you with his Knowledge, and he delires you would delift in your Ad-drefs to Bellamira, who, I am certain, will never encourage any thing of this nature without his Approbation.
I need not go about to paint the Confulion and Defpair which Seiz’d Lyfander on thefe Words, it being much ealier to imagine than deScribe; an earthy Pale o’er-fpread his Face, and So great was his Concern, that it was Some time before he could recover himfelf enough to make her any Reply. When at laft, with much diiEcuIty, he faid. What you tell me. Madam, ought lefs to Surprize me, be-caufe expefted : Men condemn’d to Death, Ihould rally up all their Courage to receive the Blow.
At this, Emelia, who was moved by a more powerful Motive than She yet knew any Caufe for, found herfelf So much infected with his Grief, that She generoully told him,
■ If
S6
The P R U D E.
/
IS he had any probable Expeftations from Olarim^ or otherwiSe, fhe would, perhaps, fecond it with a Friendfliip greater than he could hope.
LyfandeYy tranSported with this unexpeded Goodnefs in Emelia, reply'd, I know not what the providential Powers delign for me, but ever lince I have had the Honour to know you, I have regarded you with the Refped I pay to guardian Angels. I never had the Happinefs, continued he, to be fenhble of filial
, yet in your Indulgence, unknowing to my Self, I have entertain’d Hopes of receiving from you Bleflings little inferior to that w'hich fond Paternal Love bellows. For Heaven’s fake. Madam, reajfumed he, continue-that generous Compaffion you have already been pleas’d to exprefs to me, you fhall never repent it by any Offence of mine j w'hich alas, ^aaded he, is all I have power to promife. He then acquainted her with his only depending on the Liberality of, as he juftly term’d it, the bell of Men, without fo much as Shewing who his Parents were, otherwife than Qlarius had often told him, he was a Gentleman and his Friend ; and tho,^ pur/Vd he, I cannot prefs my generous Benefactor to any thing, yet he has given caufe to hope and exped whatever is in his powers not three '.Days fince, he purchasM me an Employment confiderably more Advantageous and Honourable than my former. In Short, after much .Difcourfe, flaying with her above two Hours, he at lafl prevail’d So far with Emelia, that Ihe gave him leave to write to her, and men-
’ •' '	'	C	...s ^	‘	*	V	.	;	•
tion
\ •
Prude.
tion what he pleas’d of Bellamivay whom, if fhe judg’d proper, ftiouid fee it,* but on this Condition only, that he would promiSe on his Honour never to write to that Lady without her knowledge : which he having alfur’d her of, fhe farther added a particular Care to avoid its falling into Elijlndas power, at the fame time letting him underftand, her Affiftance Should not be wanting, if any thing fell out to his advantage, if he would but acquaint her with it.
On thefe Terms fhe took her leave of Ly-fander^ whom fhe would not Suffer to fee BeL lamira ; tho at the fame time, fhe gave him greater Hopes than the fond Lover expedfed or imagined ; and according as fhe had promis’d Bellgrandy within four Days fhe left the Towti, who accompanied her, with Elijtnda^ to her Country-Seat. But what happen’d when they arriv’d there, and the many Difficulties w'hich the Malice of Elifinda created to the Lovers,with the Adventures of EmeHuy and the Surprizing Means by which Lyfander came to the knowledge of his Parents, are referved to the Second Part.
FI N I S.
i
THE
u

%
A
N

PART
II.


y
Price IS, 6d.

4	4
THE
N
D

A
L.
PART II.
Written by a ^oung Dady^
A
LONDON:
Printed for J. R o b e r t s, near the Oxford-Arms in IVarixsick-Lane. M.dcc. xxv»
Where may be had the Firft Part,
Price 1 s. 6 d.
A
. i
1,
R
THE
u
D
E.
PART
II.
HE
I
ney, Bellgrandy Stanijfay with Eli^ finda and her Woman, filled one Coach; whilfi: Emelia 2XidiBella-‘ mira followed in an open Chariot, with each of their Attendants on Horfeback.
The Summer being advanced to its greatell height of Pride, like a wanton Prodigal, pro-fufely threw all her Bounties round them, presenting to their view the Earth’s choiceft ftores, which had been long hoarded within her Bo-fom by the cold Icicles of penurious Winter | the Sun’s fiery Beams difperfing the deep verdure of the Spring into a thoufand different Greens, which intermixing with beauteous Flowers, created a pleafing Variety wherever they turn’d their Eyes ; whilft the pretty
Part II.	B	wing’d

X
‘The Prude.
/
wing’d Chorifters of the Air, on their lofty Branches, Saluted them with Nature’s fweeteft Harmony; whilft the Swift Horfes, in Clouds of Dull, fled the dinged Town, and by their eager CourSe Seem’d to Seek the untainted fragrant Country Air.
But BeUamira-, infenfible to all theSe Pleasures, often turn’d her beauteous Eyes towards the Town, Lyfander there having gain’d too Secure a hold of her Heart for Such trifling AmuSements to interrupt the leafl; thoughts of him I this Separation caufing her morefenfibly to feel his Power, imagining every motion of the circling wheels was making an eternal Di-vifion between them: in vain She Ilrove to
t	.
SuppreSs the riling Sighs j the greatefl: Happi-neSs She now wifhed, was alone to give a full vent to her Sorrows by Tears, often fancying She had too rigidly aded the Heroine^ in Sub" mitting her Self So intirely to the Gondud of Emelia, who did not want the penetration cafily to diScern the true Spring from whence thisunuSual Melancholy in her flowed; which, after having firft unSucceSsfully Ilrove to divert, She let her underftand She was not ignorant of theCauSe of her Penlivenefs, conjuring her, by the HappineSs She hoped for, not to
it; for tho, purfued Emelia, it’s a pleafing, yet it’s a fatal Fire, the more you give way. to it, and feed it, the more it will devour your RepoSe. I am, alas, added Jhe, but too well acquainted with the Danger, not to wish to Save you from the Rock on which my Peace, and all my HappineSs, hath long flnce been wreck’d, Only leaving me a wretched
infipid Life,, inSenflble of Joy or PleaSure.
<	Bedamira
\
TFe Prude!
BeUamtra never having heard Emelia make the leaft mention of her being touched with that weaknefs, tho fo incident to our Nature, looking on her with Some Surprize, Said, Is it poffible. Madam, that you, who have on every other occafion Shown fo perfed: a Command over all your Pallions, Should Suffer that one to tyrannize to Such a cruel degree as you are pleas’d to fay. Yes, replied Emeliay Heaven is niy Witnefs, it’s to the letting that one Folly gain too great an aScendant over my Soul, that I owe millions of tedious rellleSs Nights and anxious Days : Yet, continued that Lady, her Looks are clouded with So Sorrowful an Air, as but too fully confirmed the Truth of what She Said ; I was fo far from giving way to any wild inequality, or combating between Inclination and unrelenting Friends, that I had e-ven the cozening plea pf Duty to contribute towards my indulging a Paflion, the ExceSs of which has imbitter’d all my paft Life. Did yovLy purfued jhe, but know the cruel diSafters which attend my Love, that had the Sahftion of Law ahd Heaven -on my fide j you would Shun the very Name, and dread every Thought of that deceiving pernicious DiSeaSe with as great a Terror,^as you wou’d fly ill Fate, accompany’d with all her changing Scenes of MiSery.
This DiScourSe of EmeliAs reviv’d BellamL ra, and rais’d an extreme Curiofity in her to know the whole Series of a Life, of which She had already heard Several extraordinary pieces, reply’d/he. How deceitful are Appearances; fince you are fo unhappy, as you are pleas’d to ex-preSs, who Seem to be loaded with all the

B
2
Bleffings
‘The P R u p E.
Bleflings that Fortune or Nature can beftow, infomuch as to create the Envy of Some, and at the fame time raife the Admiration of al-moft the whole Province! For who could imagine Emelia, like the expiring Pheriix, Should languifh in the confuming Flames of Love, that hath llill relifted, with a fteady aufterity, the ardent AddrelFes of all the neighbouring Nobility and Gentry. You fee, refumed Erne-lia^ what a Confidence I -have in you, you having drawn from, me a Secret difclofed to none living but yourfelf, which I did to arm you againft my Fate, you having it yet in your Power to controul the young beginnings of ( I fear) your Love for Lyfander •. But alas,co»-timed Emelia, how vain will be my Advice, you being of an Age more inclin'd to receive the impreflions of that deluding Paffion, than a-ny grave Inftru6tions to ^he contrary. To which BeUamira reply'd. Madam you very much wrong the regard. I always pay to your Inftrudions, which penetrate fo deep in me, as to make an eternal impreffion on my Mind > and am confident, added fhe, did you think it proper to let me know the Particulars of your unhappy Story, I Should always wear them in my Mind as a Shield to defend me againft the fame Misfortunes. Could I flatter my Self, tz»-Jwered Emelia, in the leaft it would have that good Effeft, I Should readily let you know them, however my weaknefs might be cen-fured, for entertaining one fo young with Love-Adventures.
Ah Madam, anfwered Bellamira, do not imagine it a Weaknefs; for I am certain, fuch extraordinary things as have happen’d to you
muil
TTje Prude.
muft be both infinitely improving and diverting. Cujhema^ who attended you in the Indies^ hath told me many Particulars of the King's violent Paffion for you, accompany’d with the dangers of the Queen's JealouSy; and your flight with your 5 which hath raifed in me fo great a Curiofity to hear the reft, that nothing but the fear of offending you by my inquifitivenefs could allay j tho to obtain that Satisfadion, I would venture to incur a little of your Difpleafure. Well, reply'd Emelia, one time or other I will acquaint you with them i not but thofe things Cufhema hath been fo bufy in rehearfing, are the fmalleft part of the Vexations I have met with, and believe you’ll be convinc’d, when I have divulg’d all that hath happen’d to me, I have no mean Opinion of your Friendfhip, by trufting you with a Secret that ought for ever to be bury’d in Oblivion. On \t\i\ch Beliamira faid. Had you not riiention’d it requires fo great a Confidence in the difclo-fing of them, I would have intreated it might have been now, to divert the tedioufnefs of our Journey, efp’ecially as we are now alone 5 for when you arrive at your Seat, too many Vifiters will croud, for me to catch fo lucky an opportunity in fome Months.
Emelia perceiving her impatient Curiofity, and thinking it might divert for < the prefent the Uneafinefs (he perceiv’d the feparation from Lyfander had created, began to recount the
Tranfadions of her paft Life in the following Manner.
Emelia’s
Fhe Prude.
■ r	»»
.. c « •> V

RT.
A
will conceal nothing from you of Importance, for which reafon I mull begin with my Birth j for tho you are not ignorant I am at diftance related to your Mother, yet the little Knowledge you have of the Condition my Parents left me in, obliges me to acquaint you,, that tho many of my Fathers Anceftors were diftinguifh’d by Titles, yet he being a younger Brother, had little to dependsbn but his Sword, and in that Station .marryM my Motherj who was a conliderable Fortune for him. But they did not long enjoy the Happi-nefs, or know the Vexations of that State, my Birth fatally cauling her Death; at which her Relations, being, extremely griev’d, to comfort themfelves for her Lofs, took on them the Care of me, as a Part of her they never more, in this Life, were to know any thing of. 'Berinthia her Sifter, then a Childlefs WidoWj ^yas' the Perfon to whom I owe my Education, in wholeTendernefs I never miSs'd:a Mother i She alfo took care my Father Should render back part of my Mother’s Fortune into her Power to provide for me. I mention this now, becaufe you’ll hereafter find I have reafon to place all my Misfortunes to this account. My Father, tho he never marry’d again, living beyond his Fortune, dy’d when I was but Seven
years
Fhe P R u D E.'
years of Age, leaving me only to depend on what my Aunt had taken care to Secure; who, tho She had a conliderable Jointure, yet being a perfed falhionable Lady, vilited by PerSons of the firft Rank, fell into that unhappy Foible of Gaming, which in the end made her very uneaSy, and provM my fatal Ruin j tho I think of it with leSs bitterneSs, becaufe I am certain it was an unwary Injury, She taking an uncommon Care to give me all the Improvements I was capable to learn: I arrived to the Age of Fifteen, enjoying all the calm Pleasures that Youth and Innocence could yield in the gayeft of Company.
But alas! I had not paft above three Months beyond that Age, before I came acquainted with the Caufe of all thoSe irreparable Sorrows, Anxieties and Miferies I have lince Suffer’d. M.y Aunt-, according to her uSual Cuftom, going into the Country to Spend the Summer, we had not been a!t her Seat above a Fortnight, before Some young Ladies vifiting me, I went to Show them the coming in of the Tide, at a River that ran not two Fields from the Houfe; the violent NoiSe it makes in.its entering, is both Surprizing and diverting, it roars like the wild horrid Cries of hungry Beafts eagerly purSuing their Prey, which is judg’d to be occalion’d by the meeting of two Rocks that almoft Hop its Palfage, and cauSes it to pufh with greater force when paft that narrow ftrait, it rufhing with Such impetuofi-ty, as to overturn Boats and fmall Veffels in its way : but to Save the watry Travellers from the Danger, it warns them by its NoiSe Several Miles before its approach. This occalion’d
Some
Tfhe Prude.
feme Gentlemen that were diverting them-felves at the Sport of Fifhing, to draw in not
but Boat, under a
only their Nets, but Boat,^ under a high Rock where we ftood to view the Tide’s
entrance, which had a vaft deScent from the
River. They in that Place lodg’d their Tack
ling and Boat for Security, ^ intending, by a Path contrived on purpofe for Such Ufes, to
mount to the upper Ground ,* but as I lince
learnt, they were longer detain’d there than occalion requir’d, in liftening to our ignorant idle Talk concerning the River^ and other
trifling Things; and not being direftly be-
neath where we ftood, they had made them
Selves Peep-holes through the Greens to view
us, whilft they remain’d conceal’d from our

fight by the Reeds and Shrubs, and Rockj It unfortunately chanced, that I leaning to
reach a Butterfly, the beauteous variety of
Colours that was placed in its Wings inviting
my Curiofity to a nearer view, my Foot flipt,
I in vain catching hold of the next growing
Twigs ; for they yielding to my weight, I fell
into the Raver, where I had been Soon inevi-
tably lofl, had not BeJlviky one of the young Gentlemen before mention’d, leapt from the place of their Concealment after me into the Rmr, and diving down caught hold of me, and with no Small difficulty and danger drew me tq the Shore, the Tide approaching So clofe as to be very nigh o’erwhelming us both ; and would (cry^d Emelia, interrupting her Story) the Waves had devour’d me in their mercilefs
folds, or bury’d me in the Entrails of the
greedieft Monfier that inhabits the watry Ele-
ment, before I had owed my Life to fo cruel
and
The Prude:
and treacherous a PreServer. But why do I talk, added PreScience is not given to Mortals, elfe with my returning Senfes I Should . have loaded him with Curies inftead of the Bleflings I then implored might be iHowerM down on my generous Deliverer. But, pur-fued /he, the Outcries of my Companions quickly reaching to my Aunt and her People, they made to the Banks of the River almoft as ' foon as BeUvile had drawn me out, fenfelefs, without Motion, and few lighs of Life, to that Place, where, they have fince told me, that with a tender inexpreflible Concern, he endeavoured by all means in his power to reftore iny almoft loft Life; moaning over me in terms fo Paflionate, as fhow’d he was more interefted in my Recovery, than what was meerly due to Companion, on fuch Occalions. Whilft my Aunt, having learnt in how generous a manner he had Saved me, firft taking care to have me convey’d Home, the more conveniently to be relieved; with Expfeftions of Gratitude,' equal to Such an extraordinary Obligation, She invited him to her Houfe, to have his wet Clothes changed, and himfelf refreshed after fo violent a Fatigue j intreating Belivik to bring along with him the Gentlemen that ac-company’d him in his Diverliori: Some of them were already of her Acquaintance, and all Seem’d delirous to ftay and fee the event of my Recovery 5 which was riot long. A Sur* geon happening to be in the Neighbourhood, let me blood, and havirig receiv’d a little Water, I was Soon, with Cordials, reftored to Life, and my Senfes; Where the firft thing I learnt, was my Obligations to the generous P A R T II.	G
10
pR U Di.
\
\
Hazarder of his own Life to preferve mine: my Aunt telling me at the fame time, he de-fired to fee me before he took his Leave, order’d me to raife my felf in my Bed, and re* ceive him as well as poflible. But ah! BeUa-mira, purfued Amelia j how fhall I defcribe the Charms of my Conqueror when he approach’d me 1 even in that rough Difhabillee there appear’d fuch an inchanting Softnefs in his Eyes, mix’d with fuch an ingaging Command in his Air, that I am alter’d I needed not fo great a Prepolfelfion in his favour, to have liked, to have loved him beyond all I had ever thought of that Sex. His Words and Eyes exprefs’d an unfpeakable joy to fee me fo much recover’d. Tho my Weaknefs permitted him not long to ft ay ; yet in that Short fpace, he faid fo many eafy, tender, obliging Things, how Happy he thought himfelf in having preferv’d me from fo imminent a Danger, that I cannot help acknowledging to you, from that Moment I did nothing but think of him ; and in return for Life preferv’d, intirely facrificed my Heart, my future Peace and Happinefs to him. . For tho I was very young, I eafily perceived there was fomething in the Lahguilh-ment of his Eyes, and Manner of hSs Addrefs, which I foon became knowing enough to interpret Love, When he took his Leave of my Auntj he intreated (he would permit him to vifit mej faying, he was too much interefted rn what he had fo happily faved, not to delire to fee the full completion of it. Which, had fhe not been inclined to. Decency would have prevented her Refufal, confidering the late Obligation, and the Knowledge fhe by this time
had
The Prude; ir
had of his Birth ,* haring learnt of the Company, he was the eldeft Son of the Count D?
--1 will forbear to mention the Name of his Father’s Title, faid Emelia, becaufe it is, now defcended to him, and is too confpicuous not to be known and Ibme unhappy Particulars of my Relation being no ways to his advantage, I will only hide that Part from you.
He was then efteem’d the moft accomplilh’d Chevalier that adorn’d his Native Court, having vilited moft others for Improvement; be-lides, he had a ftock of Learning beyond what is ufual in Perfons of his Piftindion. He had already reach’d the fix and twentieth Year of his Age, and juft returning from his Travels, paid his Parents a vifit; they at that time her ing in that Country, where their chief Seat and moft Part of their Eftate lay.
But tho I was ignorant" what Impre^ion this Adventure made on him ; I will own, that as Soon as the Dizzinefs, occafion’d by my Fall, permitted me to think, I imploy’d all my Thoughts on him, and the Accident that had happen’d ; and often made my felf uneafy, with the fear that BeUvild.s faving me was meerly owing to his Gallantry ; not imagining he had Seen me before my Fall. Tho that fear was difperfed on his firft Vifit, he then taking occafion to make me fenfible, what he had done was the Effedt of the Charms ( he faid ) he discover’d in me before my fatal plunging into the River: Which I was eafily inclin’d to believe; for as young People are generally delighted with Show, and Appearances, So in my Eyes BeUvik fee^rnM to furpafs himfelf, having
C 2	change4
The pRUDEi
changed the negligent Drefs he had on before, for Fishing, to the richeft Habiliments that a-dorn a Birth-Day; which he fet off by a thou-fand Graces, and fuch a becoming eafy Pride, as made me confider him unparalleled. Nor was I a little pleasM, a Gentleman fo accom-plifli’d Should efteem me worthy of his particular Regard,* he from that time declaripg his Paffion with all the Infinuations that are ufual on Such Occalions.
But I dwell too long, continued Emelia, on Trifles, and ftill too fondly repeat what then pleafed me.
Not in the leaft, anfwePd Bellamira; for methinks I See him with all thoSe Graces and Accomplishments you are pleas’d to defcribe, charmed with your inimitable Beauty j which Time, that cruel Robber, hath not yet had power to plunder you of.
EmeUay with a confuted Smile, was going to reply, when Bellamira re-aflhming the DiF courfe, asked her. Whether this was the Per-Son She told Lyfander he refembled ? It was, faid Emelia, (immediately refleding that was the Caufe She fo readily admired his Charms) and ought to warn you to Shun areSemblance fo fatal to me ; for Lyfander is of the fame Sex,
‘ and may have a Heart as deceitfully Cruel: they are all Smooth as Summer’s Waters in pur-fuit. Beauty then concealing the ravenous Paf* fions that clofely lurk to devour the heedlefs believing Prey, when in their power, as you’ll find immediately in BeUvile a fad Inftance of. His conftant Vifits quickly Spreading round the Country, at lafi: reach’d his Father’s earsi and alfo Several of my Aunf s Friends takipg ■ '	• -■	.	th§
Tfec Prude.

n
the liberty to reprefent to her, how much Bellnjile was above my Expe(9:ations for a Huf-band, with the Impoflibility, were he inclin'd, his Father being ftill alive ; and if (he fuffer'd the Continuance of his Vifits, my loft Reputation would certainly be the unhappy Confe-quence that muft attend it. This fo alarm'd her, that fhe refolved to forbid him, tho in as obliging a Manner as poffible : Which fhe has fthce own'd to me, he received with inexpref-fible Concern j intreating her to lay afide this Refolution, protefting his Defigns were Honourable : But Berinthia being immovable, he was at laft forced to take his Leave, without feeing me, my Aunt having confined me to my Chamber, very uneafy at this cruel Separation ; tho ip that perplex'd Condition, with no Small Satisfa<ftion, I view'd him through the Window going to his Chariot, he often looking back with fo deep a Melancholy in his Air, as caufed me to imagine his Difpleafure equal to mine, at leaft; nor do I queftion but at that time it was fo. Being Violent in his Nature, he is Implacable in his Hatred ; but whilft he loves, is tender beyond all that can be exprefs'd or imagin'd of that Paflionj I have often heard him fay, he thought it re-fembled the Divine Being to reward Virtue liberally ; and punifh Offences. And indeed, furfued that difconfolate Lady^ only in what related to me, he ftridly followed this Maxim. But cruel Men do not think they Swerve from the Rules of Morality, in loading our haplefs Sex with Injury. Thus, cmtimed jhe, we parted, as I thought Eternally ; eight Days paf-iing, the moft tedious I 'till then had known :
When,
(
Prud&
When, one Morning as I was drelRngi my Maid in her Attendance mixing a deal of nau* feous Flattery ; at laft asked me, If a Letter from BeUvile would difpleafe me. My Looks giving her encouragement, fhe preSently gave me one from him, to this Purpd*e.
^BLLVILE to the Lovely
EMELIA.
♦
Eturmng home fuU of a thoufand uneajj Thoughts at Berinthia'r halving fo cruelly deprived me of the only Happinefs I could or can k fenjible of, from the Moment I firjl beheld all that is Lovely or Deftrable in Emelia •* Tet in Additm to this unfpeakdble Misfortune, 1 find the fame kjj Spirits which created in her fo fixd a Severity, have likewije reprefenfed to my Father my regard for pu, with fo much iU-hature, as to occafion his forbiddiyi me' to entertain a thought of that inexprejfM Charmer : Which, aEs! is impoffible to ok] ^whatever I owe to Paternal Duty') it not being inmj power to fupprefs d Pajjion 1 am certain is eternal!] rooted in my Soul, T’ho, to appeafe his prefent watchful fealoufy, together with your Aunt’r unnecejja-ry Caution, 1 would fain flrive to prevail on you, in pity to the infupportable Anguijh your Abfena hath caufed, to confent Ifioouldfee you by the Mean] the Bearer will propofe. 1 conjure you, do not re-fufe this one Requeft, to him who will facrifice ai Things to gain the fmallefi Interefi in Emelia’i Heart, it being intirely in her power, to make me the mofi Wretched or the moft Happy of Men^ hut not in Heaveifs to make me any other than her
tonate Adorer,
BELL VILE.
. ‘ ThQ
p

Tho I was infinitely charmed to firid BeUwk was not inclin’d flightly to quit the Thought!} of Lvve and Emelia; yet when I read that Part, where he defired me to meet him without JSmwfh^’s knowledge ,* I was Seized with
a Trembling, as if Nature, in a convulfed
was yielding me up to Death; So great a Terror did it fill me with: I being not So young, as to be heedleSs of my Aunt^s Advice, who did not Spare to repreSent to me, with but too much appearance of Reality, that Bellvile^s only Aim was, the Ruin of miy Innocence : Which, methoughts, this Letter had but too much the Air of, in defiring to See me in So obScure a manner. Wherefore, with looks of ReSentment, giving the Maid to un-derftand I would acquaint my Amt \a\xh. BeU^ •viVs Defign, and her being a faithleSs Partner in it; the Girl being frightned, by a thousand Intreaties endeavour’d to bribe my Silence, confefiing, his Valet had prevail’d on her to deliver it to me, and, if it were poffible, to get me to a Farmer’s about a Mile from Berinthid.Sf under pretence of a Walk, where that lovely Seducer was to meet me (attended only by his Valet) diSguis’d like one of his Father’s inferior Servant/^-
When She had ended her Tale, and found my Paffion to abate. She ft rove by many infi* nuating Arts to prevail on me to go; and in-^ deed, faid Emelia. it’s hard to deScribe the

War
Love
already too powerfully invading, inclin’d me to hearken to every thing that favour’d him; but then, on the other fide, I dreaded even his CenSure of Such a fond Compliance to his Re-
queft.
j
l6
Ti&e Prude
•1
queft.’ I remain’d in this Perplexity a whole Day, Several times being ready to acquaint my Amt; which certainly I had done, had I not fear’d her proceeding would have been So Severe, as intirely to haveftopt all Hope of a future Correspondence, the very Thought of which I could not bear; tho, fortunately, at laft. Reputation, and the fear of venturing on Dangers I w^s So much a Stranger to, caufed me only to anfwer his Letter to this Effed.
AMELIA to the Dangerous
^ELLVILE.
Kno*iiJ not whether I ought to inform you ml what ReluSiance 1 am forced to deny the gem-vous Preferver of my Life.
But your Requefi being fo contrary to the Ruh prefcrihed me (to guard what is, and ought to k, dearer to me than Life) 1 dare not ‘venture on a Breach of them.
/ have not acquainted my Aunt with your Let* ter, hecaufe fhe fears you much more than I do, which could you find the Means to vanquifh, you might eafily obtain from her what you feem fo deft* Yousof.
Stho I am certain, tD Severity of our Frienk will caufe you foon to lofe all Thoughts of Emelia; Ttet fhe can never forget how much jhe is indebted to
Bellvile. / am.
Lour obliged humble Servant,
EMELIA.
I
The P
faid
IJ
hide my Love, as I was afraid too cold an An-fwer would have created in him the like Indifference j and with all the Impatience of a young Heart, too tenderly touch’d with that Paffion, I waited my Maid’s Return, (who went at the Time he had appointed to meet me.) But fhe only brought me the discontented News, that Bedvile, on reading ray Letter, expreSs’d an angry Concern at my not coming, and would not be perfuaded but I had told Berinthia; whom, he faid, he was certain had ordered me to write that Letter : and only coldly presenting his Service, bid her to tell me, I had robb’d my Self of the fincereft of Lovers, by depriving him of every means to be Such.
This threw me into Such a diSconSolate Grief, that I thought nothing at that time could have equall’d ; often repenting my Ti-morouSneSs in not venturing to See him. But thoSe Thoughts would in a moment change into a juft Indignation, to find on how flight an Occafion he could ceaSe to love. But whatever Afliftance I had from my Refent-ment, I could not reflect on the Charms of his paft Conversation, without finding, it muft be from Time only, that I could hope a Cure for this early, yet too deep Imprellion; which had So great an Effed on my Temper and Looks, as to occafion Berinthia to take notice of it: who Soon got the Secret from me ; and very much approving my Condud in it, from that moment flie deScended from the Authority of 0. Parent, to that of a Friend; taking this opportunity of inforcing, how little truft was to
PartII.	D	be

i8
Fhe Prude.
be put In that faithleSs Man j who, had you met him (fatdfhe) would have received you /with all the ardent Tranfports of expecting Love ; but finding you were not w'eak enough to fall into his Snare, you fee he’ll foon lofe the Thought of you in other Amufements.
But to my Misfortune, purfued that Lady^ I found her no ways Prophetick in what concern’d him, who was too violently bent on his fatal Love^ to reft ’till he had found a more fuccefsful wayj which he did, by the Afli-ftance of a neighbouring Lady : who, according to their Contrivance, as he hath fince told me, perfuaded my Aunt^ and me, to go with her to a Perfon who w'as lately come into the Country, and was reckoned to have an extraordinary Forefight; the People reporting very ftrange and furprizing Wonders of his Knowledge , tho he was Dumb. And that unhappy Inclination to Gaming, I am certain, induced my Atmt to go and inquire of this fuppofed Seer, whether the Planets would be more favourable to her for the future in that darling A-mufement, than they had hitherto proved. But tho the Lady had taken care to give Bellvih Notice of the Day we defign’d to go, yet he did not appear ’till fome time after we were there; that it might look the more like an Accident. Here,
faid
I
cannot mention his Predidion, which in part happen’d, tho I am uncertain, whether I ought to impute it to Chance or Knowledge; who all the while I was writing ( for he could neither Speek nor Hear) fixing his Eyes earneftly on me, with
much more Attention than he did either on
♦
my Aunt or the Lady, at laft wrote my Fate in thefe Words.	Ones
The pRUDEi
lO
Once already have you efcaped the Dangers of the liquid Element y yet e'er the revolving Sun three times changes the Seafon to its prefent State^ torn from all you lovey in diftant Seas and Lands, you
fball jiruggle voith greater Dangers,------- / fee
tempefluous Waves, a Wreck, Daggers, Wounds, Poifon, aU arm'd with DefiruEiion, ready to de^ vour you j but Death foaU not o'ertake you.’—-’—^ Tou will return to your native Landy honourably Rich, and at lafi —~ {but long— long will it be firji } calm Content, and balmy Peace, fhall crown your Days; and when you, childlefs, think to defend to the Grave, you fall be blejfed beyond a Mother's Hope, with all blooming Excellencies, in a Son, as fully to compleat your fond Maternal foy.
There being Something So extraordinary in this Prediftion, we were employM in talking of it *till Bellvile approach’d ; who expreSs’d a Surprize mix’d with a Seeming Shame, at being caught in Such a weak Curiofity, and turning it off with a pleaSant Ridicule, Said Several diverting things of himSelf on that Occafion, deliring my Aunt to affift him in what Queftion he Should ask: She (tartly anfwered) bid him inquire whether his MiftreSs would not disappoint his next Affignation ? No, {reply'd he, flung at what fhe faid) it Shall be of more Importance; which is. Whether I Shall ever have the Happinefs to obtain her ? Accordingly writing to that PurpoSe, the Seer, or Fortune-teller (for I am dubious which to call him) anfwer’d, Tou will, but not according to your prefent Defire; tho Fate in all TEhings feems to crown you with Succefs, Marriage only excepted;
D 2	which.
’•U.r
•■^'-7' -V^'CC-S.S^^T''^

TK)^ Prude.
•which, could you beware of ^ealoufy, would he inr
Happy : But 1 fee a falfe Friend, rob-
exprejp
hing you of your too much loved V/ife.
Tho
I cannot reconcile thi.s Predidion of BeliviVs to the Event; yet what he told my Aunt, and the Lady, fell out exadly as he faid.
At laft, this Subtle Lover, with a handfome infinuating Complaifance, took Care to inform her, he had a Bill of hers Sent him from the
Marquifs
which Ihe had given him for
a Gaming Debt, telling her, the Marquifs owing him as much, he had discounted it, intending to wait her Conveniency “for the Payment ; or if ShepleaSed to make another Trial, whether Chance w^ould give it her back, or double it to him. Tho nothing could be more Suitable to BerinthiVs Inclinations than this PropoSal, yet not being inSenlible of Bellvile\ Drift, She anSwerM him, Ihe had already Suffer’d too much to venture any more j adding, ihe would Speedily take care to make him eafy. On which, he tore the Bill in her light i Saying, he knew he had a PerSon of Honour to deal with, and would not be at the trouble to keep Paper. This Addon of BellviVs, join’d with his artful AddreSs, So wrought on my Aunt, as immediately to change her Behaviour and Sentiments of him ,* which to compleat, he having accompany’d us to the Lady’s Houfe, where Cards being Soon called for, he took care to loSe back to her moll: Part of her Debt before they parted. Tho he hath lince Said, he did it with Delign ; yet he feign’d as dif-fembled a Concern, as if it had been incirely owing to his ill Luck.
A •' " •• ••




'• -..................
til.-.,..	_-r
I




-tfl
Vw-i•••	. --tc. ^• r-j-


■■>t<rC.TV

‘iTje Prude.
IL
I dwell longer upon this Point, faid Emelia, becaufe I would convince you how many various pernicious Ills, Gaming has occalion’d: BellviVs Artifice w^orking fo powerfully on this unhappy WeakneSs in my .Aunt, that contrary to all her former Refolves, I am certain ihe came to Town much fooner than Ihe intended, that he might with the greater freedom vifit us without his Father’s knowledge; not that he obtain’d this Point, but by a thou-fand Proteftations of the Honourablenefs of his Defigns. And at laft, I believe, finding every other Means impoffible, he gain’d on my Aunt and me, to confent to a private Marriage, on this hard unhappy Condition, That both of us were bound, by Solemn Oaths^ never to reveal it ’till his Father’s Death.
I cannot help, faid Emelia, on this occafion making a few Reflexions on Clandeftine Mar-
which Seldom are found Fortunate j it
riages.
Seeming as if Heaven defign’d the Parents Ap-, probation to confirm this Sacred Knot. However fatally Inhuman it may be, to Separate two Hearts united by the pleafing Force of Love ; yet, too great a DiSparity of Circum-ftances, after the firft TranSports are over, often cauSes the PerSon that has the Advantage, to look with a haughty InSolence on the other, who by that time is made too much an Equal, calmly to bear diftinguiShing InSults. Not, Emelia, that I had the leafl: ReaSon to complain of this fort of Treatment; for BeU-•vile was Surprizingly kind to me, ’till the lafl: fatal Shock ; no Happinefs being comparable to that which I enjoy’d in this Secret Marriage, tho I often thought, the Ifolen Sweets too
much
%'i.
The Prude.
much refembled forbidden ones. And indeed, purfued this unfortunate Lady, I am afraid there is little difference; both fides, by the Concealment, lying too open to the Allurements of the other Sex, not to caufe a Repentance in one of them. And as Men are more liable to change, it too frequently happens (they having nothing to reproach them, but the hidden Stings of their Sleepy Confciences) they leave the unhappy Wife abandon’d and defpis’d, under the reproachful Title of a forfaken Mifirefsi Which might have proved my unhappy Condition, had I claimed a Right, he had too much the Power to conceal. The Inducement, which made my Aunt fo readily yield to this fatal Match, being at her Death discover’d, which happen’d in lefs than a Year after: I then found, to my unfpeakable Sorrow, all my Fortune Squander’d away, by her gratifying that cruel Inclination to Gaming: And tho, when I acquainted Belhile, in Tears, with my Lofs, he Seem’d to comfort me, by defpifing it; yet afterwards, he laid hold on the Indigence of my Circumllances to compleat my Ruin. Not but for the prefent he feem’d. the moft tender and indulgent, that ever wore the Name of Husband; out of his Allowance taking care to fupply me in Such a manner, as to create no fuSpicion of my Fortune’s being leffen’d, which he advis’d Should be conceal’d.
At Berinthia*s Death, I was above half gone with Child, which was conceal’d by the Pretence of my going out of Town on my Aunt\ Affairs. My then bewitchingly tender Belhik omitted nothing that might exprefs the height of Love, it being impoffible to tell you with
what


‘The Prude.
Z2
what Joy he receiv’d the little Belhile in his Arms, faying, he was the only Rival that Should fliare with me his AlFedions. But alas !
I was not long to polTefs fo great a ftock of Happinefs, the remembrance whereof is ftill
Woes that envi-
pleafing, amidft the many ron’d it.
But before I draw to the cruel Scene of our
Separation, I muft mention an Accident which
he thought would have furnifhed him with the
Means to accomplish the treacherous Defign he had long been breeding to get rid of me: It happen’d that as I was with him one Night at the Play, in a DiShabillee, placed, as we i-magin’d, from publick View, we were perceiv’d by a Friend of his named Marimont; who, tho I was afterwards extremely fobliged to his Friendship, I cannot help thinking, the Charafter he had obtain’d, of a bright Genius, blended with an unqueftion’d Judgment, was more owing to a Satrical ill-natur’d Turn, than a true genuine IVit^ it being moftly im« ployed in Ridiculing not only the Vices, but Foibles of our Sex : And having too often met with Succefs on that Theme, he carried it to fo great a height, as to aflert, we were all little better than Idiots. This, as I learnt after-
wards, had created feveral Difputes between
him and BeUvik; whofe pretended good Opinion of my Senfe, caufed in him a general Complaifance to moft of the Fair, on that fcore.
But whatever Marimont^s Pretences were.
there was fomething he had feen in the unhap-
py Emelia, on that flight view, which in fpight of the defpicable Opinion he had indulged of
our
s C-



r
Z4
F%e P
our Sex, caufed him to refolre on being acquainted with me : And vifiting Bellvile the Succeeding Morning, immediately began to ral-
if he thou£?ht he had
Amour
ly him, as it ne tnougnt ne naa an with Some young Perfon of Diftindion j faying, I was indeed pretty enough to attone for the Soft Nonfenfe he fuppofed made up a part of the Entertainment. On which, faid the griePd Emelia, my falfe, my greatly unworthy BeUinle^ Irving his Delign deeper than the o-ther’s ludicrous Wit could reach, pretended to be fo alarm’d, that he fell into a warm Vindication of my good SenSe: Which the other oppoling in his ufual Satirical manner, the Debate at length ended in a Wager, That if after three Hours Converfation, Marimont did not yield, I was a Perfon of as excellent Senfe as ever he had met in one fo young, Bellvile would forfeit double what the other had laid. Thus you fee, faid Emelia, how thoSe different Defigns were working for my Ruin I Marimont falling into this Wager, to get acquainted with me ; whilft the other as artfully inforced it, to be rid of me: dilfembling to me the introducing of Marimont^ as a Perfon whofe Conversation I Should be infinitely diverted with; and giving it the obliging turn, of ftiil finding Something new to amufe me.
When they came, Bellvile by Chance, or the more to enforce his Defign, with a prodigious Gaiety addrefling his Difcourfe to me; I happen’d to anfwer him with a freedom that caufed Marimont immediately to yield up the Wager before me. That falfe Deceiver affured me, the only Reafon why he did not acquaint
me with it, was, that he imagin’d I Should be
over-
Prude.
*3
over-awed with theapprehenfion of having my Converfacion criticized i by which means I might loSe my native Sprightlinefs. Tho* continued Emelia, I was not very much pleaSed at his expofing me, yet I fondly imputing it to the extraordinary Opinion he had of me, imagined it an Adi of indifcreet exceflive Love
Marimont from that time frequently viliting me, I at laft began to fear from his affiduous Complaisance, and fome unwary Words, that he had Views very unfit for me to encourage* And without mentioning my Sufpicion to Bell^ •vikj I was often denied to him 5 and a Month had paft, in which I was intirely freed from him by his going into the Country,whenB^//w7a finding this Scheme did not take on my fide, re-folved to proceed in a more abrupt Manner.
One Evening, the laft fatal Time I ever Saw him, this falfe, yet lovely Deceiver, who in all his Adions had hitherto rather ShewM In-creafe of Love, came to me, his Vifage pale^ and every Feature exprefs’d an inward An-guilh: perhaps a little touched with Remorfe at the inhuman Ad he was about putting in execution, or the more artfully to compleac his PurpoSe ^ after*he was Seated for a confide-rable Time, he looked very earneftly at me without Speaking a Word. Which Surprizing me, together with the DiSorder I fancied appear’d in his Looks, that Seem’d infinitely concern’d, I began to enquire of his Health : to which he coldly ,reply’d, he was well; and fiill keeping his Eyes fix’d on me, Tell into a violent Invedive on the Inconftancy of Women, Alarm’d iSat this ftrange Behaviour in him, who never before had expreSs’d the leaft turn F A R T IL	E	that

Prude.
that way, I ask’d him, what late Inftances he had met with of that nature, to occalion his exprefling So feeling a Refentment, as if nigh-ly touch’d by fome unworthy USage ? To which this artful Diflembler reply’d, I am fo far from fearing any Injuries of that kind, that I think my Self bleft beyond all that Imagination can form into Willies, of your Sex’s Excellences— you being attended with every Charm that can engage or Secure a Heart. Befides, added he^ if ail my SenSes are not deceitful, you love me too, far beyond my deSert—your Adions Seem to be accompanied with So open a Candour, as if your Superiour Underftanding Scorn’d, or was an entire Stranger to all the trifling mean Diflfemblings too frequent in your Sex. But (comimed he, making Paufes as he went on) you may deceive me
it is not impoflible falSe—
-- but you may be very and that charming Sincerity of your Soul, which has appeared to be So cloSely united to mine, that you could not help imparting to me all you knew, as to your other Self, may be a Subtile DiSguiSe to difarm Diftrult from prying into blacker Crimes you would not have known.— Yet Heaven is my Witnefs, pur-fued he^ I had rather ftill be thus pleafingly deceived, than one moment endure the tormenting Thought, that my Emelia Should or can
be Faithlefs.^---1 cannot tell you,/aid that
unhappy Lady, with what an amazing Terror this Difcourfe of his fill’d me: Being frighten’d, I replied. For heaven’s fake, let not that Fiend, Jealoufy, pofleSs you j for tho it’s Said to be the conftant attendant of a Love too violent, yet I am’certain it muft be a Love
that
Prudi:
I ,	^
that cannot be approved by Reafon: elfe, how is it poffible to harbour So ill an Opinion ofc' that we are naturally fo much inclined to like? And if you have any Caufe of diftruft, added /, do not conceal it from me, who am too Secure in my Innocence, to fear the blackeft Afperlion Malice can invent : Or if any Libet^ ty of mine is difplealing, let me but know my Offence, that I may change it to what may be more agreeable to my Belhile. To whicB that lov’d Deceiver replied, I believe you ? nor perplex yourfelf with any Fears, it being impoflible for me long, or indeed at all, to entertain a doubt of your Faith, Truth, and everlafting Love : what I'have faid, is 6\^iffg to a Fit of the Vapoursj which I fidd alread;^ begins to difperfe; immediately turning off his Difcourfe to another
to another subject. Yet, me-? thoughts, by Harts, he was uneafy; after ask-? ing with an uncommon Earneftnefs, whether I loved him. In the Morning, he acquainted me, he, was obliged to go out of Town for three Days, and begged me not to ftir out till he returned; which, tho’ I readily Complied with, amaz’d at the Serioufnefs with which he prefs’d So fmall a Trifle, J could not help telling him I imagin’d he had Some myfterious Conceal’d Meaning and
But he anfwering, that he was only poffefs’d, he hoped, with a foolifh Fear, that Some ill Fate would attend me if I did not comply with his Requeft ; took his leave, ftill importuning me on no Occafion to go out. tilt he came back ; Which alas 1 faid the wretched Enielia, was to be along eternal Never.	,
z	Thus

iTje P rude^
Thus his feign’d Fears fill’d me with real ones ,* ordering myfelf'to be deny’d to all Vifi-tors, I retired to my Clofet, and ferioully re-fleding on the Strangenefs of his late Behaviour, refolved not to reft, when next I faw him, till I had discover’d fully the Caufe of this unufual proceeding in him. Thefe uneafy Thoughts imploying the Day, at laft the Night approached, in which the treacherous' Bellvih was to ad his Scene of execrable Villahyi'^f^nd-ing me a Letter in thefe Words,

..f
My Dear Emelia,
^INCE 1 faw you, an unlucky AccidetuIefd ^ me: I am forced, contrary to my Morning-in-treaties, to beg you would not delay a Moment, but iome immediately with the Bearer of this to rm; my feeing you, being of the utmoft Importance. 1 know I need not fay any more, to haften Emelia io her Impatient
BELL VILE
not frighten yourfelf, but when you come, infied of your eternalAdorer, enquire for Gayfly ^ youll
know my Reafon for it, when I fee you.
‘ * '
I no foonier read this Letter, but too much terrified to have any alliftance from Reafon, I hurried away with the Bearer, without taking any of my Servants with me ; imagining Some* thing of Confeguence had befel him, perhaps unfit for them to know: And> according to imy Diredion, asking for Gayfly, I was received by an ancient Eerfon, who told me he would be there immediately. And flaying not above
p
Z6
two Minutes with me in a Parlour, that had the appearance of a Gentleman'’s Houfe, left me by myfelf, where I heard Several confufed Voices whifpering in the next Room : And fo far did my frighten’d prepolfefs’d Imagination carry me, that I thought I heard Bdhile,, louder than the reft, fay. Let me go, for I will flab her falfe Heart this moment. On which, I made to a Door, that open’d into that Room; but finding it faft, the noife made in twilling the
who before had
Bolt,
brought the Perfon,
into the Room
fpoke to me, if I would walk up Stairs, would follow me.
; who told me, the Gentleman
I doing as She had delired, was indeed immediately followed by a ridiculous Fo/>, who making a carelefs Bow, approach’d in a Minuet-ftep to the Looking-glafs, where linging and viewing himfelf for about the Space of ten Minutes, he at laft turning to
May the Furies blafl nie, if I don’t think
Provoked at the fa-
handfi
miliar PertneSs of the Coxcomb,
together
with the concern at not feeing Belhile, I made to the Door; which finding lock’d on the out-fide, So added to the Terrors that already had got polSeffion of me, that like one bereft of SenSe, I immediately fell a rapping and ftam-ping, I am certain, loud enough to alarm the whole Neighbourhood. But no one appearing, and my Fears and Vexations increafing by the Fop’s forward NonSenSe, I wanted little of beating my Brains out againft the WainScot; crying, and tearing my Linnen, Sometimes in Tears lamenting myfelf^ I would fay. Where is Bellvile! —— what does aU this mean /—— fure / am betray’d-^ mdon€>"<^^ and he is murder’d, or
elfe
r
jd	Prubej
elfe / am certain he laould have been here. To which
the pert infignificant Fool,—without or Comprehenfion of my inexpreffible Concern, w ould anfw’er, ‘Then Bellvile is the
Senfe
anfw'er,
^yet^ there are Perfons the Ladies infi-
Not but that he is an
A
happy Man^— nitely prefer before him: accomplifhed Gentleman— for fo negligent a one— but you are fo paffionatBy there is no fpeaking to you.—PVho has provoked you ?—Confound me^ ■- if I doPt think you are a charming	Then
returning to the idoIizM Mirrour, and reviewing himfelf, he would fay, his Wig fat abominably to-^day,—tho’ PeviUe had fancy*d the Air excellently fuitable to his Features and Complexion ; only he was grown a little ruftick of late, with hard drinking, which he vow’d had caufed his Teeth to look of a perfed Aurora-Colour.
Tho I defpifed the Coxcomb too m.ucb, to think any thing he faidworth anfwefing j yet, vex’d at his treating mywith fuch contempt, I renewed my .Diftradions to get away i little imagining he was doing an Ad fo far exceeding this Fop’s innocent Folly, as muft fire all that hear it with an abhorrence of him.. In. fhort, after teazing myfelf, and I believe the Fool, above an Hour, vowing if I could not get thence, I would throw myfelf out of the Window, he at laft
N
my Deliverer, by calling up the People and faying, they had left hini wnth a mad Woman, diftradedly in love \n\th Beltviie. And then, asking them where the Perfon was, that I came to fpeak with, they pointed to the Beau. -But on ray Saying, tho’ I enquired for Gayfiy, BeEvile was the Perfon I wanted; they an-
fwered
p

they knew none of thst nsme.
find
to
fwered me,
which being extremely frighten’d, myfelf in a ftrange Houfe I knew nothing of, I immediately run down Stairs, and making to the Street, called a Coach, and hurried home.
But my haplefs Fate, which dellin’d me to endlefs Miferies, ordered it fo cruelly, that whilft I was abfent, Bellvile had been there j and not finding me, pretended fo great a rage, as to ftab a Pidure of mine, that hung in the Room, in feveral places, calling me by names too grofs to be repeated, wilhing me there, to be ufed in the fame manner. And would to Heaven, (purfued that affiiSied Lady) I had j for then Infenfibility, or more perfed Happinefs, would have fucceeded that Short Pain ; whereas cruelly ftabbed, by his inhuman Falfhood, I feel each day more lively Pangs, than Racks, or Daggers can give, without the relieving hand of Death, to eafe my eternal Inquietudes.
I cannot exp refs to you the confufed variety of my Thoughts on this fatal beginning of my Mifery.—But that Belhik Should be falfe or treacherous, not once entering my thoughts ,* I imagined I had had Some Trick impofed on me : And pafling the Night reft-lefs, as if extended on Thorns and Briars, I waited, with the Impatience of a Wretch condemn’d expeding a Reprieve, the approach of Morn; and BeUvile, to clear my Innocence. But alas I inftead of ought to confolate my diftraded Uncertainty, I received the following Lines, to compleat my Miferies.
The
3^
‘The Prude.
The wronged ^ELVILE^, to the unworthy perfidious bafe EMELIA*
A
hoody
/
FP E R fuch apparent Proofs of your Falfe-
/ think I pay too much refpeB in lettim you know 1 am even acquainted with it-~^did 1 not intendy at the fame ttmCy to pumfb you, if poffble, as you deferve leaving you to make a Lrade of what you have hitherto purfued only for PleafurSy where your tainted Beauty willfoon become the Scorn and Derijion of Fools y more defpicable than him pu have injured me with : PVhilfi Infamy, Difeafo and Povertyy fhall fink you beneath all Pityy ani make you more wretched than J wifh to fee you.
At firfi 1 thought indeed to have ended you ad your matchlefs IVickednefs, by a thoufand flabs in that falfe Heart ; but I foall leave you to Hearn, and the TIhorns of your guilty Confcience, for having fo vilely injured him whofe doatmg folly neojtt knew a Pleafure equal to that of heaping Bleffmis on you.—But now I will turn them to Curfes, ad if you dare exert yourfelfy will make you a terrihk Example of Ingratitude and Perfidioufnefs.
Do not pretend to anfwer or make dijfemhlini Excufes, which I don t queftion but you are ingmi-oufly contriving. I this moment fhall quit tht Lowny and with it, all thoughts of you for ever.
Ah ! (faid Emelia) what an amazing Stupi* dity was I Seized with, on the reading of this Letter 1 I remained deprived of my Sen-fes Some Hours, yet in that Space of InSenfibility I was happier than when my returning Senfes made me more lively to feel the matchlefs
Tortures, Sorrows and inexpreffible Anguifh I
have
Fhe Prude.

But not being able
have ever fince endured, to bear the inSupportable Thought, that Belhile could be falSe, I rather fondly flattered mySelf that Some bufy Perfon had contrived a wicked piece of mifchief to part us j and calling to mind, how earneftly he had intreated me not to ftir out that unfortunate day, I began ftridly to examine the Letter that drew me forth. But there I found every Tittle re-fembled his hand, with the particular Cypher that he writ in all his Letters to me. This drove me beyond all that can be iraaginM of frantick Rage and Grief, to find he Ihould avow his Treachery in fo bare-facM a manner, and then infult me in fo cruel a one, without leaving me the leaft glimmering of Hope to vindicate myfelf, and convince him of the Injuftice and Barbarity of his Afperfion : which he was but too Senfible I would, doubtleSs, purfue j it being impoflible, by all my ftrid Inquiry, to trace the leaft Shadow of him, or where he
Nor was I without the Thoughts of examining the People where he fent for me ; but the Confufion that Hurry had occa-fioned, together with the Treatment of the Fop, and the Fright of not meeting him, had cauSed me neither to mind the Place, or ask the Names of the Inhabitants. ■
Thus left deftitute of all Means to relieve myfelf, or Hope of Confolation, I thought to go and eaSe my inSupportable Load of Sorrows, by moaning over my little Belivile: But oh, added this unfortunate Ladjy fully tocompleat and, finish the unrelenting Malice of my Fate, I found this inhuman Father had convey’d him for ever from me. Unable tQ bear this laft,
F	this
was gone.
F A R T II.
?4
4
T«^ Prude.
this more than inhuman, this deadly Stroke, I fwoon’d at the dreadful hearing of it; It being long before they brought me to myfelf, on the Bed which they laid me, without referve, I gave vent to the infupportable Anguifh of my Soul in bitter complainings to Heaven, of my too, too barbarous Fate ; the unrelenting Cruelty of the Father and this inhuman merci-lefs ,Separation from my lovely, my only Child, more dear to me than Life, when attended with Happinefs. But alas 1 faid Eme-lia, furfuing her Difcomfe, in tearsy Complaints and never-ceafing Lamentations were all the relief I ever was to find ,• it being impoffible to defcribe to you the many torturing Agonies that harafsM my Soul, the moil lively Imagination being too poor to conceive any Part of what I then endured.
Doubtlefs, anfwerd Bellamira, your AiHi(9:i-bns were unutterable, and have already fo in-^ fedied me, that I feel the Swelling Flood labour upwards to bear yours company. Not but, addA that young Lady, I muft have a fuller Conviction of BeUvile*s being falfe, before I can think any other, but that there was Some curft Engine of mifchief, that undermined and IhatterM this tender Union of your conjugal Happinefs. You will foon be convincedyanfwePd Emelia, that deftroying Engine was himfelf. But, faid Bellamira, interrupting her^ did you never hear afterwards, what became of your little Son ? Yes, reply^d that fad Ladyy not long after I learnM from Marimonty Death, in a little time, made eternal the barbarous Separation the Father begun; taking him Before his Innocence could be wounded with the galling
Knowledge,
1
/
Prude^
5'Sf,
Knowledge of ow ing his Being to the worft of Men, and feeling the injurious Weight of his own and haplefs Mother^s Wrongs j whilft Nature and Fortune, oppofe every Means of Revenge or Redrefs. But to purfue my difmal Story, faid that Lady, I pafs’d ten days bewilder^’d in this diftrading Grief, when Marimont, returning from the Country, made me a Vific. After Some little Difcourfe, my Impatience being on the rack, I began to inquire if he had lately heard ought of Bellvile. He anfwered, that he heard he went out of Town in fuch a hurry, as prevented his taking any Leave of his Friends, or letting them know where to write to him j tho'’ perhaps on inquiry, he might find him out. I then, difguifing as much as poflible my uneafinefs, told him I would take it as a favour, if he could get a Letter conveyed to him, relating to a Bufinefs of importance,' that required his being Speedily acquainted with. To which Marimont anfwered, he would imploy that Evening to learn where he was gone ; defiring me to get my Letter ready againft the next day, he then intending to wait on me with the Succefs of this Affair. Accordingly, on the morrow, he came and told me, he had found out BeUvile was gone to his Fathers, who had Sent for him on Some earneft Bufinefs : and, if I pleafed, he would convey my Letter under a Cover of his. This being what I defired, was immediately done j but on further Talk, he intimated Bellvile*s Speedy Journey into the Country, was thought to compleat a Marriage his Father had lately pro-pofed to him ; which being a Severe Confirmation of his late perfidious Treatment, it rouSed
F 2	’	aU

Fhe P R U D E.
all my late inSupportable Griefs to fo great a height, that unable to fuftain the Shock, I imade to the Window, giving Vent to a Flood of Tears, I found were not to be fupprefs’d. But alas ! I could not fo artfully conceal them, as to pafs unheeded by Marimom, who civilly offered to withdraw. But it beingimpoffible to Support fo great a Weight of concealed Woes, without having one Friend to confult, to eafe, or chear me with the leaft faint hope ; and believing he had already difcovered too much, I ftoppM him j faying, Holdy I conjure ym.^ fiaj. Grief and Shame hindering me from proceeding, I pointed him to a Chair, and, trembling, fell myfelf into another, without fpeaking for Some time; Mil he broke the Silence, by faying, he fear’d the News he had unhappily mentioned, had caufed the fatal Concern he perceived; which he endeavoured to moderate, by inforcing the Uncertainty of its being true. But I anfwering, the guilty Bellvile had already given me but too convincing Proofs of his Falfhood, to doubt this Truth, he exprelTed an Amazement that is not to be reprefented by Words I faying fo many handfome things of his unqueftioned Honour, Juftice and Regard for me, as led me to let him into the whole Affair (my Marriage only excepted) tho’ Decency obliged me to own, too Solemn Engagements had pafs’d between us, for him to break, without fearing - the avenging Powers would reach, and greatly punifh his Perjuries. And when I related his late Tranfadion, and Showed him both the Letters, he, like you, believed Some cruel Enemy had poffefs’d him to my disadvantage: perfuading me to moderate
my
The P
37
my Grief, ’till I had an Anfwer, which he doubted not would rellore me to my paft Tranquillity. But oh ! it was So far from affording me any Relief, that he only vouchfafed to fend me word, he had committed my Letter to the Flames unread, intending to Serve every thing in the fame manner that came from me j which redoubling all my diftraded Defpair, Mari--monty touched with fo generous a Pity at my forlorn helplefs Hate, undertook a Journey to Beliviky on purpofe to explain this Riddle of his Ufage.
A whole Fortnight pafs’d in that cruel uncertainty, tormented by a thoufand Fears, Anxieties, and ftupendous Sorrows j yet a few glimmering Hopes ftill buoy’d me up from quite finking beneath the Weight, ’till Marimom*s Return, whole Looks declaring his Succefs, it was fome time before either of us Spoke. At laft, with much difficulty, I rallied up Courage enough to bid him begin, and let me know the utmoft Malice of my Fate, which could not be wdrfe than I ex-peded ; and if it is poffible ( purfued 1) tell it me in Terms that may turn me into Stone, who cannot Suffer more than I already endure. Would to Heaven (anfwered he) what I had to
fay, was as pleafing as I fear, muft be otherwise
as I know it
But to flatter or difguiSe, would but deceive you into fnore deadly bitter Sorrows. ISio(faidl) go on,—goon—and give me to know it in the moll terrifying manner, I am afraid I Shall have Life to hear
you out:-----
Miseries can be
But go on ( continued / ) no
To which he reply’d, after Some PauSe, I dare
not.
The P
And yet you muft know it.
not.-------
In fhorr, with a reludant Difficulty, he acquainted me, trembling whilft he related it, that that more than barbarous Man received his DiScourfe of me in a ludicrous manner, hinting as if I had bribed him by Some extraordinary favour to become my Advocate j and that, as he never deligned me other than for his Amufement, he thought he had done me a particular favour, in bringing me acquainted with a Gentleman, who Seemed So inclined to Serve me: but I at firft not underftanding
taken more proper Me-
had
him, he thods to be rid of me.
proper
And as for the Let-
ter I pretended he had wrote, he was very indifferent what I thought of it j only this, he would affure me, I Should never have it in my power to make the like pretence again. Man-mont added, that when he intimated to Bellvih^ I talked as if too Solemn Engagements had paSs’d between us to be broke, by ought but the vileft Perjury i he flew into a Scurrilous Rage, Saying, At that rate, perhaps I might pretend I was married, which he would take care to punifh with all the Severity of the Law, if I but dared to whiSper it with the Softeft breath j retorting, all my Pretences of that nature muft be indeed Supported by a dam^nd Perjury. In that ( refly*d /, hardly able to utter fo much) he has declared the Truth: But it is enough ( purfued /) I need no more I could proceed no further ; a Giddinefs Seizing me, I thought I heard Marimont^s Voice a great diftance off, and yet his Words Sounded on my Head like the inceffant Strokes of Hammers; I was inSenfible what more became

Prude.
39
came of me, tho’ I learnt afterwards, with much difficulty they got me to Life, it being above a Fortnight e’er I diftinguifh’d the bright Beams of Light from Darknefs ; and yet my returning Senfes were fo cruel, to bring BeU-vile firft to my Remembrance, and all that he had done. But Youth and Nature affifting in fpight of my infupportable Aillidion, I at laft o’er come it. Tho’ it is certain, it was to Marimonts Friendship I owed my Prefervationj who in that helpIeSs State took care to have me vilited by the beft Phylicians, with other particular Obligements; which tho’ I took care to return when I recover’d, would have been an Ad of excellent Generolity, had I not afterwards perceived it was not without the View of being paid by a far too lavifh Price. I was perfectly well recover’d before he would increafe my Affiidions by acquainting me with the death of my Son, who licken’d of the Small-pox immediately on the change of his Nurfe ; and I fuppoSe, for want of Care, was loft: Heaven thinking fit to take his Innocence, and referve me only for much Sorrow and aflliding Mifery.— Beginning already to be within the view of Want, in addition to all the reft, my Furniture and a few Jewels being all I had to fupport me, the dreadful Thoqghts of what would become of me, often interpo* fed amidft my Mournings for my loft, myfalfe^
but my ftill loved Bellvile.
In this forlorn wretched State, my only Confolation and Refuge was to beg the heavenly Afliftance for Patience; whofe Mercy not quite deferring me, foon pointed out a 'way to preferve me from perifhing under the
meager
40
Prude.
\
meager Gripe of Poverty, tho* my other Mif* fortunes were to know no end. It happening I had a Relation lately married to a Merchant who was going to the Indies m a confiderable Employment, and She paying me a Vifit, to take her leave before Ihe went, luckily let fall, fhe would be glad of a Gentlewoman, whole Conversation was agreeable, to go along witli her, tho’ on the Terms of providing lor her, I am certain it was not aimed at me, yeti immediately took the Offer j then informing her how my Aunt had left me, adding a later Lofs had reduced me to Such Extremities, as to make me think her Offer very providential, if: fhe would accept of me: Which fhe did witli a great deal of PleaSure, telling me I muft pre* pare myfelf with all imaginable Speed, thef being obliged to go to their Ship in lefs thai^ a Week. Accordingly I Sold my Furniture and discharged my Servants, without acquaint
; and Marimm
ing any one with my Defign ; late Behaviour having diSobliged me, tho’k happen’d to vifit me the Morning before!’ went out of Town, I only told him, thi hoping the Air and Some Company I had chofe to go into the Country with, would divert me, I had took this Opportunity to retrench nift Expences, intending to return in leSs than a Month. He Seem’d very much to oppoSe ani blame what I had done, nor would he parti from me, till I had told him where to write
to me
omitting no proffers of his Friendfhip,,
flay. But finding him trouble-j
I diredited himtol
/ T \
to invite my
fome in his Importunity,
write to me to the Town where the Ship lay:
which being populous, prevented his having
any

‘The Prude.
any Thought of my intended Voyage. Thus I took leave of Marimont^ and began my Journey, or rather Voyage, with my Coulin, difguifing as much as poflible the inward An-guilh of my Soul. The inhuman Ufage of BeUvile^ like a Secret Gangrene, prey’d on my Mind So Severely, that I could not have any tafte of HappineSs, or even enjoy the common Comforts of Life. ’Tis certain, BeUvik would not have dared to ad So arch a piece of Treachery, had RedreSs been within my power. But had I been inclined to break through my Solemn PromiSe to the contrary, yet my Amt^s Death, and his procuerraent of the Clergymanj^ whoSe yery Name I was ignorant of. Love cau-ling me then without any SuSpicion entirely to confide in him ; kept me from So doing. And indeed when I was throughly convinced of his unparallel’d BaSeneSs, with Refentment great as my In juries, I choSe rather wandering to rely on Providence, than even be where his olFen-five Name might wound my Ears, and have him ftill triumph o’er me in his WickedneSs.
Means
Tho’
I had not the power to leave him for ever, without fending him the following Lines, di-reded to his Father’s, putting them into the
Poll, juft as the Spreading Sails Summon’d us on board.
E JMELIA to the Unjust, and greatly Barbarous BELL VILE.
JE^EARLESS read thefe Lines^ ivhich are the laji you wiU ever receive from the greatly wronged Emelia j v)ho was always too compliant to your P A R TII.	G	Defres^
rv ^
Prude.
DeJircSy not to afftfi you in this lafl^ of an eternal Separatiofiy inhich Jhaii be as jar as diftant Seas can /enter us.	'
Pho* / fuppofe you expeEi I jloould upbraid your matchlefs Faljhood in aU the bitter Verms our in^ jured Sex pour fonh the Anguifl) of their Souls^. / 'wiU endeanjour to fupprefs the tortured Anguijh of mine ; and only teU you., your Contrivance was as Mean, as Inhuman; firft, to draw me out by a Letter^ then in a fucceeding one, feriouflj pretend me the Aggreffor.
Nor am I infenfble you have fecret Fears that I fhould aloud proclaim 'my Right, and confront you, tho* defiitute of all Proof but your faithlefs Self, But be not tormented with any Apprehenjtons on that /core, fince I have lofi the Heart that gave me Bellviieh Hand, there is nought elfe worth mj Value.
Tet thou wer t once dearer to me than any thini the World can give me m Recompence for thy Lofs. It was too hard, too fever e, to rob me of a Hush ad and a Son in one Day: Vhe lovely little Bellvile might have been fome Confolation to his afflibiei Mother j 1 could o^er him have mourned my Sorrows, his fmi ling Innocence would have eafed in fome Degrees the mighty Anguifh of my Heart. But perhaps you thought it Wifdom to difpatch his tender Infancy, whofe growing Youth might often call his injured Mother to your Remembrance, and haw created uneafy Thoughts.
But be not too confident. Repentance may com too late for atoning your Injuries, and Death way long before feize on the wretched
EMELIA.
The
Tihe Prude.
4?
The difpatching this Letter being the lait thing I did on Shore, we all halted to the Ship, and began our Voyage ; the Wind from the moil favourable Point filling our Sails, which, like expanded Wings, flew through the liquid Elements of Air and Water. But O ! Bella-mira, purfued that fair Unfortunate, what were, or how fhall 1 make you SenSible of the inex-preffible Anguilh, Grief, and Mifery which I endured, Handing on the Deck ! Tho^ I was the leSs minded, moll in the Ship being touch’d with Concern to leave their native Country, expofed to the Dangers of the inconllant Seas. But my AfHidions were of a deeper Strain than to have any fenfe of fuch Trifles; my falfe, barbarous, yet my Hill lov’d Belhile, only poll'efs’d my Thoughts : nor could I fee the Shore behind me, without imagining it a Sepulchre, where all my Joys were buried. My little Belhile, on whofe budding Charms my fond Hopes were fix’d, already, like the ihort'lived Rofe, was mouldering into Dull | the Fathers baneful Perjury having blafted the Tree, and beauteous BlolSom : And whilft .the Tears in torrents flowed down,complaining thus to myfelf, I laid. How haplefs is my Fate ! mull I then never more behold Belhile again ! the only Delight of my .fond Heart: How cai>
I part from him and live !
Then calling to
mind his tranfcendent Bafenefs, Refentmenc for a moment would come to my aid ; but alas, in vain ! The Softer Impreflion by which he had firft bound me his, would ftill prevail o’er all my Efforts to drive the tortur’d Anguilh of Love and him from my Breaft: Tho I wouI4
G 2	ofcen
44
rk p R u D e:
being cer-
}■
often fay to myfelf, Whatever I fuffer, Bellvik cannot know it; he cannot now triumph in my Mifery, as he cruelly threaten’d. But then my wandering Thoughts ftill flying to what moft had delighted them, when I fix’d my Eyes on the roaring Ocean, I would think, Is it poffible that Belhile, the fame generous Bellvik, who, fearlefs of gangers, dived into the bofom of the Deep to Save Emelia,—Should in fo inhuman a way force her to wander on a more mercilefs one, to avoid being devoured by the meager Hand of Poverty, which he has turned her loofe to ?——
But this tedious Relation (purfued Emelia) having too much revived my paft Sorrows, I will defer the reft till after Dinner ; tain we are not far from it ; whilft BeUamira, whofe Attention had hitherto hindred her, began to exprefs her Deteftation and Horror at her Husband’s Ufage, faying, his unparallel’d Wickednefs exceeded all that could be thought of unworthy or bafe in that Sex. But Emelfa looking on her with a difcontented Smile, faid. You are but little acquainted with the Worlds to imagine BeUviVs faithlefs Treatment without Example ; for were all the Wrongs of our haplefs Sex to be publifb’d, the famous Alex-^ Andrian Library would be by far too narrow to contain the nuniberlefs Millions of our repeated Wrongs from Mankind, who fucceffive* }y have laid hold of our great Credulity, to undo us. The young Beginnings of Love are agreeable, conftant, tender, and feem-ingly fincere; whilft the Conclulion ends in Negleft, Scorn, and too, too often Hatred; of which my Bellvik is a cruel Inftance. His
i	'	»
eager
The'2
45
eager Love pur Sued me firft with endlefs Blef-fings, which being lelfenM by eafy PolTeflion,
I Soon became an Obftacle to his new Defires; Th is, join’d with the drea4 of his Father’s DiSpleafure, caufed him to look on me at length as the loath’d Objed that oppofed his Happi-nefs; and having no Fears, but thofe which might arife from His too drouzy Conscience, you fee how he Shook me without Re-morSe or Pity.
Emelid.s Difcourfe was here interrupted by their arrival at the Inn, where their Dinner was prepared ; wHich no Sooner was over, but they purfuing their Journey, Seated as before, and BeSamira renewing her Solicitation, Erne-lia continued her Relation in thefe Words;
With prosperous Gales, Surpaffing our Hopes, we had already reach’d the Bay of Ben-galy and were almoll: within the ken of our intended Haven Peguftnhtn the faithleSs Elements changing into raging Storms, made us Senfi-ble of their Inftability ; the impetuous Winds, in Spight of our Mariners Skill or Oppofition, driving us athwart, above a hundred Leagues: The Rain, Thunder, and Lightning were So extreme, as hardly to diftinguifh the Day from the dark Hours allotted for Reft. The be-wilder’d Sailors, thus deprived of Stars and Sun, their friendly Guides, at laft perceived themfelves drawn in by an Eddy, or Stream, So violently, as muft Soon inevitably dafh them bn a Rock, or Swallow them in (^ick-fands; HopeleSs, and paft all other Red refs, we endeavour’d to Save our Lives in the Long-Boat; but finding we were not far from Land, firft fired Guns as a fignal of Diftrefs 5 which
proved
4^
The^
proved So fuccefsful, that the Inhabitants made
from the Shore in their Canoes, which they turning and winding Suitably to the Nature of the Stream, providentially preferred us.
It was then, purfued Emelia, that I began to fee what Death was, the terrors having ever fince been infixM in my Mind : For tho* one would have thought my unparallel’d Misfortunes Should have made me look with Contempt on the outrageous Winds and Sea, con-fpiring to devour me, the Effedf was very different : In thoSe Moments, all my Offences crowding with lively horror to my Remembrance, I trembled ^t the thought of So fpeedy an Appearance before the divine Tribunal,* yet that dread was not comparable to the fear which Would often intermix of Annihilation j that all the noble Faculties which now aftuated this Frame, were to ceafe, and leave the then inanimated Clay to moulder into Duff: Never rnore to think, or be thought on, was more terrible to me, than'all the Mi Series my Imagination could form, of Here or Hereafter,* which makes me wonder, how Atheifts can be fo fond of indulging and Spreading that empty Notion, fo disagreeable to our very Natures.
But to return from this little Digreflion to my Story : We foon, by the Afliftance of th^ Inhabitants, gainM the Shore, where Crouds furrounded us, gazing with no leSs Admiration, than we on them. Their Features, Language,Complexion, Drefs, and Turn of Limbs, were fo very different from the Europeans, I could not help imagining but that I had already pafs’d through the cold iron Hand of Death j and was wafted o’er by the dreadful
Ferryr
Fhe P R U B E.
47
Ferry-men, to the frightful Regions of another World. But tho’ their Looks, Geftures, and Garb, were leSs plealing than thoSe Cuf-tom had habited me to; yet with Humanity more agreeable they brought us Some of their choiceft Food, which dire Neceflity caufed us to receive with rapturous Joy, tho^ no lefs ftrange, and barbarous, than themfelves. The very next Day we were conveyM to the City the King’s chief Minifters relided in; on the way, we Saw our Ship fplit on a Rock, an4 the Natives in their Canoes endeavour to gain as much of the Spoil, as the cruel Seas would render back : which melancholy ProSped caufed the Joys our reprieved Lives had fill’d us with, to ceafe ; efpecially my Coufin and her Husband, whofe All in that cruel Rack was devour’d. This made our Hunger and Want of Neceflaries, prey with greater Torments on our Minds; not knowing whether Fortune would allot us to Death, or Slavery : Yet in this helplefs Condition, my Coufin had infinitely the Advantage of me ; her tender Huf-band Supported her in all her Sorrows, while my forlorn Self feem’d abandon’d by all on Earth and Heaven.
We remain’d three Days after we were brought to the City (our Food and Lodging Severely hard ) before we Saw the Governour ( who in that Language is ftiled Emer-Xemla J as being next in Dignity to the King of Gokon-da^ on whofe Territories we were cafi-^ which bordering on the Empire of the MoguI their Cuftoms, Laws, and Religion are much the fame, only an inferiour Monarchy. Yet the King and his Favourites are immenfely rich.
Swallow-
1
r R u h E.
/
fwallowing up the Food, Liberty, and Happi-nefs of the People: Millions of laborious Mortals contributing to make one luxuriously Great. The Habit of the Governour was as furprizingly grand, as the Peoples are meanly wretched; his Turbant and Robes Sparkling with Gold and Jewels radiantly bright: He refted on a fine Perfian Carpet, a Canopy of the -richeft Atlas umbrella-fafhion o’er-fpread-ing him; whilft Several handSome Youths, with feather’d Fans, allay’d the Heat of the Air and Sun. He Spoke to us by a Portuguefe Inter-■ preter, which my Coulin’s Husband under-ftanding ; Emer-Zemla made a very particular Inquiry of what lately had happen’d of Importance in our Nation, which he Seem’d to have more knowledge of, than could be ex-peded from any one in Such remote Parts; and indeed, methoughts, there was Something in his Air and Looks, that did not altogether reSemble the other Natives; when perceiving him, ( whiift my Coufin and the Interpreter were diScourling ) to fix his Eyes fteadily on me, I was So frighten’d at it, tho’ I knew not why, that being already opprefs’d and faint with the Hardships I had undergone, I funk down, and fell on the Floor without any figns of Life : Which cauSed thofe that were nigh-eft me, to cry out, I was dead, ( mennoning me hy my Name) The Governour compaffionate-ly taking notice of my DiSorder, having firft recommended my recovery to the care of his
Attendants,
Queftions
concerning me, even So particular, as that of my Birth, Family, and preSent Condition; w hich having learnt by the Interpreter, he
ordered
‘The Prude.
49
©rdered the chief Paflengers with my Coufins and Self to be lodg’d in the fame royal Palace he relided in; where, with great Refpeft, we were accommodated with all the choiceft Varieties the Country could afford, prefenting my Coulin and me with the richeft Indian Silks and Chinees, for our Clothes.
In this uncertain State we continued a Fortnight, our Misfortunes being fomewhat allay’d by his generous Treatment; when one Morning my Coufin and the other Gentlemen were call’d before the Governour, who gave them to underftand that having had Companion their Misfortunes, he had interceded with the King not only to give them liberty to go where they pleafed, but the third Part of what was Saved from the Wreck Should be re-ftored to them, befides Some Prefents which Emer-Zmla in his Bounty Said he would be-ftow on each of them ,* defiring only, in return, what they knew he could command.
To which they all joyfully affented, except my Coufin, who, I believe, w'as a little touch’d at the HardneSs of my Fate; which deftin’d me the Sacrifice by which they were to gain Freedom.
And indeed when he returnM to us, he
►	I	?
could not relate on what Terms they were to obtain their Liberty, without paying a few Tears to the Misfortunes ,of her who Seem’d allotted by adverSe Fate alone to endure the
Burden of Heaven’s offended Wrath.-----But,
added Emelia, how Shall I paint to you my receiving this difmal News ? Their departure being defign’d that Afternoon, I gave vent to-
that
the leaving me behind.

my Grief in So outrageous a manner,
PartII.	H
the
n *.
'Sv
50
The P
the whole Palace rang with my Complaints: Sometimes I would beg my Coulins to ftab me to the Heart, rather than leave me with a barbarous People, fo hopelefs of Redrefs, as neither to underhand them, or be underftood. Then prefumptuoufly would I enquire of Heaven, what were my Offences, alone to be fingied out, and doom’d to Such unheard-of Miseries. But my Complaints being as fruitless as the Pity or Concern of my Couhns, and the reft ,* committed to the care of my Attendants, I Saw them depart, exprefling an inconSolable Grief at this cruel Separation! whilft I imagin’d I had now nothing elSe but JDefpair and Grief to end my Days.
In this deSolate Condition I remain’d till Night, fo much o’er-come and preSs’d by my haplefs Fate, that quite weary’d out with Woes, I thought Life would Soon leave its wretched Abode, and yield me up a Prey to the remorSelefs Arms of Death. BelJvile and all the cruel TranSadions of my Life revolved in my Mind, with matchlefs Horrors ^ when I perceived the Door of my Apartment open, and Emer-Zemla enter alone. I was too much alarm’d before with the fear of my being detain’d there perhaps, from Something he might like in my Peribn ; which this Midnight Vific confirming, I now expedled with beating Heart, and cold convulSed Agonies, the completion of my irretriev able Miferies. When approaching nearer, to my great, but delightful Amazement, be accofted me in my own Langiiage, Saying, I fee you Shake and tremble, but don’t let
one Fear perplex you j I come with balmy
Comforts, to heal your
Mind
as
‘The PRUDEi
as unexpefted. Ah! Emelia) from what an Extreme of Sorrow to Joy did theSe Words change me 1 when, in addition to it, opening his Arms to embrace me, which with reluctance I declined; he Said, Fear not to receive, to fold in your Arms a Relation, a Parent i it’s your Father’s Brother that embraces you, and will be to you a Friend, a future Father, all that you can with. I needed no more to fling my Arms about_ his Neck, and in Tears
---^and incoherent
Words, exprefled my Gratitude, to him, to Heaven; who, whilfl: I thought he was loading me with MiSeries, had wonderfully turn’d
In thofe moments calling to my remembrance I had often heard mention made of a Brother younger than my Father, bred a Merchant, w'ho went to the Indies, from whence he heard he was murdered, on Some
nfported J
them toBleflings.
by the Natives, who juft before he went flood my God-father ,* Heaven allotting him ( for it was indeed he) by his Tender-nefs and Generolity, to prove more than a Father, in Shielding me from Fortune’s future Injuries.
The firft Sallies of our Joys being a little over, he began to inquire of his Relations and Friends, and what difafterous Fate had forced me to fo remote a Climate. On which I acquainted him with my Fortune loft by my Aunty nor did I conceal from him any part of Belivile^s ufage. The Torrent of Tears that flowed on this occafion, he ftrove to moderate by fuch gentle Advice, and fo many endearing Aflurances of his Friendship, as gave my afflidled Soul greater Confolation than I had
H 2	known

‘The Prude.
known from the moment I was confirmed of BelhiVs Fallhoodj nor did we part, before he let me into the moft remarkable PalSages of his Life, with the Difafter that occafion*d his deceiving his Friends with the cruel Belief that he was dead : which I Ihall flightly touch on, bccauSe you’ll, by it, the better underhand the Series of my Relation.
Abdalla, the then King of Golconda, held the Crown in right of his Queen, the youngeft Daughter of Cotuh-fha the preceding King; who having no Son, was forced by a cruel IVaV) almofl; to the Deftrudion of his King--dom^ to conSent to the Marriage of his eldeft Daughter with Suid Munwood the Second Son of Oureng-Zeky he hoping thereby to add the Kingdom of Golconda to the Empire of Mogul. But Cotuh-Jha, bearing him a mortal hatred, and being extremely fond of his youngeft Daughter, the PrinceSs Majhakuy refolved to fix the Crown on her and her Heirs ; and intirely devoting himfelf to Pleafures, left the management of Affairs to her : by which
having
means,
greater Liberty than is ufually allowed Ladies in thofe parts, her young Heart Soon became captivated with the Charms Abdalla, "whok Father w'as an Arabian of a noble Family, but low in Fortune ; and having a Soul above his: Circumftances, refolved to travel, and Seek Preferment in foreign parts. Being known to feme PerSons of Quality when he came to Golconda^ he was by them introduced to the King ) who, pleafed whth his Perfon, and Add refs, firft gave him a Small Government, in which he behaved himfelf fo well, that he was Soon advanced to the moft confiderable
Employments
The P
f ^
n
Employments in that Kingdom. In which, and his Prince’s favour, he continued “till hii^^ death: but then all his great Riches being feiz’d on by the King^ who is the general Heir of all his Nobles, none of the Subjeds in thofe Countries having hereditary Eftates j young Ahdalla, his Son, was reduced to a very mean condition. But having that which could not be taken from him, his Father’^ Spirit, Beauty, and Wit, he entered himfelfinto the King’s	(or Guard) where thtPrincefs
feeing and liking his Perfon 5 foon contrived a nearer View, by getting him admitted into the Seraglio 5 where his Ingenuity and handfome Addrefs made an intire Completion of his Conqueft 5 fhe from that moment omitting no opportuniy of feeing him, which was almoft every night.
* And it happening at this time, that my Uncle came to Golconda on Affairs of Merchandize, he fell into an Intimacy With daUUy who being liberally educated by his Father, had learned feveral European Languages ; this caufed him to have a friendship for the Merchants whovifited thofe partSi and particularly my Uncle, whom he made Ms Confidant in this Intrigue with the Princefs. He not having the Discretion to fupprefs the irregular Defires of Youth, prevailed on Ahdalla to take him with him in one of his midnight Vifits to the Sera-^ gUoy where it feems he made himfelf agreeable to a Miftrefs of the King*s. But both the Lovers at laft being caught, the Tears and Intreaties of the Princefs fo far wrought on the indulgent Father, thoit he not only forgave, but married her immediately to	proclaiming
him his Succelfor.	But
TiE/e P r u o e.
But my Ui2c//s Crime being of a deeper and blacker dye, and wanting fo powerful an Inter-cclTor, the Lady was that Inftant put to death, rcferving his Execution for the Succeeding
that they might infli^ the more ex-quilite Torments. But Abdalla^ not forgetting his Friend in his Advancement, perfuaded the the Crime had gone no further than Intention'; which fo far wrought on his mercy, that the Sentence of Death was changed to another fort of Punifhment, which qualified him, wittethe Beauty .of his Perfon, and the Intereft of the now Prince Abdalla, to be a Guardian to the Fair ; in which ftace, hf '^con-tinued^tiffthedeath of the old Amg : but then the confiant Friendfhip ^ oi Abdalla^ who fuc* ceeded the mother, foon raifed him to the Title of Emer-Zemla, the chief Minifter in Power and Honour next'the in which ftate he had contihued'ever fince.
I fouti^/by my the fhame of this Misfortune ot^ai^oned the report of his death ; he contrivingrt thac the Merchants who accompanied him' to that Kingdom, Should believe bctwa^ n^urdered on the Spot. Tho’he owned to me; he often had had Defires to return to
X.	i t t
his ; native Country; the Difficulty of ac-complifhmg' which, rather increafed the Aw/s
k), and the confidence he had in his
not inclining him to hearken to his : Not but he now afl'ured me, it Should be doubly his Care for my fake, whofe Looks ( he faid) when he firft faw me, put him fo much in mind of my Dafhfr, thathe could not turn his Eyes off me : And under-
ftanding all that was faid, immediately on hear*
ing
The I
ing tny Name mentioned, when I
imagined me a Relation ; which, on Inquiry,
finding to be So nigh, caufed him to lodge us, without diftindtion, in this Palace : tho^ he did not think fit to make himfelf known, till after the Departure of my Friends j fearing I fhould either defire to go with them, or prefs their being detained, the laft of which, might have railed a Jealoufy in the King. However, he ventured to plead for the Liberty of his Country-Folks, with the Reftoration of part of their Goodsi afluring me he had taken care to have them conduded fafe out of the Kingdom; giving liberally to all,-but particularly to my Coufin and her Husband, fo as to caufe them not much to deplore the Wreck : tho* to avoid the King’s Sufpicion, he refrained from the pleafure of converfing with them.
In Difcourfes of this nature, we pafs’d the Night, till the Sun’s fiery Beams o’er-fpreading us, when he withdrew, I was left to a Sweeter Repofe than I had long before been acquainted with. Now confiding in his Friendfhip, 1 flattered myfelf with returning home; and being Partaker of his immeiafe Wealth, I thought Bellvik would even repent his injurious Ufage on the Score of Intereft : tho* theSe pleafing Hopes were often intermix’d with the fear of my Uncles dying, and leaving me again forlorn and helplefs; which occafioned my repeated Intreaties to haflen our flight. Not that i wanted any Amufement a rural Life could yield ; the Groves, Springs, Gardens and flowery Meads, incomparably Surpaffing ours. And tho’ thofe of our Northern Climates complain of the xcreme Heat, with the venomous Infects that
infeft

5<5
mje P
infcft them;
yet there arefo many dies for each, as hardly to be fenlible of their Injuries. Yet the want of Converfation ren* derM it very tedious to me, in the Abfence of my Unde, who was too much employed in Affairs of State, to yield me much of his Company. This Solitarinefs cauling me to indulge my Grief for the Lofs of my faithlefs Belhi\ to divert that Unealinefs, I ftudied the Language of that Country, making myfelf perfed Mijluji of their Fables, in which their Hiftory is loft; they being much fonder of Allegory, than the plain Simplicity of Truth. Thus were three Years wafted, ftill preiSing him to contrive out
Reme-

/
Departure ; being fenfible he had flipt feveral opportunities by his over-timidity ; whicli was fo great, that I believe he would never have had Courage to accomplifh it, had not a fatal Incident drove him to it for a refuge.
For fome of the Minifters envying my Unck\ great Intereft with the King, and it not being in their power to charge him with Injuftice which had often intrapM them ; they tool hold of my being with him, and inform’d his Majejiy, that an European Woman, of exquifite Beauty (for fo they were pleafed to ftile me, the more to inforce their purpofe) was hid by Emer-Zentla, and by the refped: which he paid me, they imagined he had fome extraordinary inducement for it, which he had preSumptu-oully concealed from his Majefly. The amorous King, whoSe Gallantry, in fpightofhis obligation to the Queen, admitted of other Miftrefles, immediately fired with their De-fcription of my Charms, fent an order to Em&i-
‘Zemla to have me brought to Court

My
ne P
51
My Uncle no Sooner refceived this affliBing Command, but he came to my Apartment, not to confult what was to be done, but to tell me I muft obey. Tho* I was too much ufed to Fortune’s fevereft Injuries, to wonder at any thing; yet this Sudden Shock, after So long a Calm, prevented me from being able tQ Speak for Some time j whilft my Uncle placing himfelf over againft me, I could perceive the Tears ftanding in his Eyes : And when he heard me complain of my hard Fate, that never was to leave persecuting me, he Said, Oh! Emelia, your cruel Stars have now indeed determin’d you Should know your helpleSs Lot, for nothing lefs than a Miracle can retrieve you. And why ( added he ) was I born, to See So near a Relation, a Child I may call her, thus torn from me, without one affifting Power to relieve her, from this miferable but certain Doom !—•‘-^When, after Some Paufe, he Said, Prepare, Emelia, prepare > for you muft go 5 and as the leaft Cloud of Sorrow or discontented Look, will Sentence us / both to death, ftrive to difguife your inward AnguiSh with an outward Gaiety : Perhaps time may make it more Supportable, Defliny has left you but two Lots to draw therefore ftrive tografp the beft, which is gaining the King’s Affedion. If he looks on you with approving Love, the whole Nation will bow to you, the haughtieft. Minifter will be your humble Slave; by which we may ftill find a means to efcape. But ( added he ) I am too well acquainted with the Seraglio, not to tremble for you, Should your luckleSs Chance be either to be neglected or Scorned.——I know the Difgrace would too P A R T JI.	I	Soon
t
I
i f
The P


foon overtake me, to be able to redrefs yoU| whilft you’ll be turn’d to the outward Apartment of the Women ^ to be begg’d by fome Favourite, or elSe, in that imprifoned ftate, wafte a wretched Life, barely fupported with Necef-'faries i the Guardian	Avarice robbing
them of the allowance in Such a ftiameful manner, that often' pinching Want opprefles them 5 they being too fenliblei thofe unhappy 'Women will never be admitted to the royal Ear, to pour forth their Wrongs^;
i was too much fuprizM at what my Uncle (aid^ not to hear him without interruption till he had done; but then with Refent-mentand Grief, anfwering him, ILaidyUncle^ I efteem my Misfortunes double,, fince I find there is a Probability of involving you in them y for which reafon I w'ould intrear, what ever I am to tuner, you would guard your own Safety, and leave me to my Fate, who am refolved rather to die than Submit to this Dram: which, could I opiate my Con* Science to an eternal Sheep, could not, even in this Life, yield me any recompenfing Joys to at tone for the Offence which I hope Heaven will give me fortitude to throw off with indifference, rather than continue it by So black a Courfe of Sin and Mifery. My Unctey already afhamed of his eafy Compliance ( an extreme Timidity being his fault ) began to expollulate with me, by Saying, Life was not given us to part with when we pleaSed ; therefore we had
no remedy but Submiilive Patience to the divine Will.
But theSe DiScourSes yielding no Relief, and the time of my Departure drawing, nigh, determining

The P
59
termining in what manner I would aft, I comply’d with my Uncle s Advice, in being dreSsM with ail the advantage ol Ornament and Art, not confining myfelf exactly to the Forms of their Country, yet keeping So cloSe to what Cultom had made agreeable to them, as neither to appear ftrange, or ridiculous. But I will not, purfued Emelia, trouble you with my Anxieties on the way thither, nor the trifling Ceremonies of my Guardians when
I arrived, till the approaching Lrening, in which I faw the Ring. They having firfl: prepared me with a Bath and rich Odours, fet out with Gems and all the Ornaments of a Bride, I was by two of the principal Eunuchs led to an outward Apartment, only Separated from the King by a Curtain of thin Muflin, embroider’d with Gold and variety of Flow^ ers, on both lides perfeftly alike ; to which they advanced fo clofe with me, as ealily to perceive his Majefiy through it lying on a fort of Mattrefs, the Bed of that Country, railed three Steps higher than the reft of the Floor, with Ebony inlaid with Gold, Pearl, Agate, and other valuable Stones, and Wood ; the Workmanfhip of which was fo exquifitely fine, and the Luftre So extremely dazling, (that tho’ my bewilder’d Senfes were quite o^er^* come with Sorrow and Pain at fo near an Approach to what I refolved to fhun with Death,) yet I could not help gazing with Amazement on the beauteous Order and Art in vvhich the Birds, Trees, Beafts, and Serpents, were in-trail’d, as naturally, as if the Originals had been prefent, Exaftly between the Floor and ^rch’d Ceiling, by an invifible Hold, a large
Iz
^	A

'60
The Prude.
them.
Canopy o’er-fpread hinty compofed of ah Oval-fafhion round ,* on the out-Iide of which, were Images of Boys, whofe large plumed Wings waving to and fro, created a cooling Breeze : A thoufand cryftalline Lamps added a Luftre that furpalSed the Day, and pain’d the Sight % whilft on the lower Floor, Several BaSons received Water, which was rendered to
in murmuring Sounds, out of the Mouths of Crocodiles, Dolphins, and other Creatures not only carv’d, but painted in fo lively a manner, that I beheld them with a fecret Fear of their being what they only represented. Nor was his tawny Majefly lefs magnificently Set out, than his Apartment; his Robes and Turbant being one entire Blaze of Diamonds and precious Stones. And indeed I cannot help owning, thus adorned there appeared a majeftick Grandeur in his Looks and Manner, that awed and terrified me, tho* in careleSs Eafe he feem’d to yield himfelf a Votary to Love. Harmonious Sounds concerted with the falling Waters, and all the in-chanting Graces of our Sex, with vocal Mu-fick, added an unrefifting Softnefs to his
Soul.-!--He lay like one intranced in Plea-
fure J the Songs no Sooner being ended, but there appear’d fix Women lightly habited, who danced fo excellently fine, that none I ever Saw in Europe were comparable to them. Their Sprightly Airs, eafy active Motions, and Speaking Eyes, were too forcibly skilled in all the Rhetorick of Love, to be refilled by any Heart that was not guarded with more than human Fortitude. Still as they approach’d, pr Surrounde.d the Throne, from large Jars
firewing
‘The Prude.
6t
{Irewing towards him rich Odours and Flowers, I could not help fancying they lookM like the Graces infpiring Mortals with new, but inimitable ways of creating and inviting Love. But tho* they danced with a Swiftnefs beyond Thought, yet fo conftantly were their Eyes fixM on the KitJg^ that on a Slight Movement of his Hand, they ail vanished in a Moment 5 and the Curtain being drawn the fame inftant, that was between us, the Eunuchs approach’d with me, to the foot of the Throne ; which having kifs’d in humble Reverence, they withdrew backwards, leaving me on bended Knees there, where I quickly funk down on the
but
lower Floor, not to pay a Homage to it, fo extremely frightned, that quite deprived of my Senfes, I remain’d motionlefs; till the Kingi prepared by all thefe Pleafures, perceiving Something in my Looks (tho’ pale a^id wild with Fear ) that pleafed him, by a Con-defcenlion not known before, advanced from his Throne, and raifed me in his favage Arms; {filing me by the names of the fineft Fruits, and faircft Flowers : He told me, I
ceieftial Lillies
from
and
Sprang and
Lips,
me,
Rofes, and was
Sweeter far than Jelfamine and all grant Indian Odours, the delicious flavour of non-parallel’d Pine-apple being on my which already he had made too near Approaches to. Embolden’d by this Softnefs in his Behaviour, I rally’d up Courage enough to throw myfelf at his Feet, and addrefling him in the moft fuppliant manner, faid. Great; Sir, permit a wretched Slave to fpeak ; tho, | am confcious, what J Shall declare will draw
immediately your Diipleafure and Miniflers of
Death
6t
‘The P
Death oh me ;'The latter I have taught my Soul with a thoufand ftruggling Agonies to meet unconcern’d, rather than by a Deceit or Fallhood, juftly merit your Indignation. He liftening with a fix’d Attention, reply’d, as near as I can exprefs the manner of their Lan^ guage in ours; Fearlefs Speak on, for AbdaJIa fwears by himfelfy and all the Sacred Deities, that hover round and guard this Land, which once like me they ruled, till Summoned by the firft Mover to more bleft Abodes, Death Shall not fell this tall Cedar, (alluding to the height of my PerSon, which you know Sur-pafSes moil Women) nor change the pearly Lillies with which Nature has covered thee, till thou goeft with me to the Fields of endlefs Blifs, where each Moment ftrong Delire, and Love renewing, thou Shalt be my chofen, ray
felefted, my only beloved------* fairer than if
thou hadft already drank of the celeftial Spring of renewing Youth, and heighten’d Beauty: But till that Hour of Change comes, let us here begin to take immortal Joys, in thy Arms. I am, faid Emelia, more particular in relating what the King faid, to give you an Idea of their manner of CourtShip. But gathering more Courage from this Solemn Declaration, to preServe me, I ftill continuing on my Knees, faid. Dread Sir, be pleaSed to hear, and then Summon all your Mercy with the Remembrance of your royal and greatly generous Vow, to Save a helplefs Unfortu?
nate-----far unworthy of Such Honours or
your Sacred Notice, my. humble Fate having call me beneath all Such ambitious Thoughts; my Vows and Perfon have long fince been
given
P
ftopM,
given to an Inferiour, by Ties too folemn for ought but Death to fever. Here I perceiving the Anger beginning to flafh in his ” He anfwering in a hafty Rage, faid,
—- e’er I will be
Eyes.
And Death fhall fever you
deprived of fuch a ftore of immenfe Pleafure : Name him quickly; thou foolifh Woman, to fully the fair Idea I had received of thee, with the loathed Thought that another has polfefs^d thee: but quickly name him, left my retarded Vengeance fhould fall on you.——Ah! anfwered /, that I exped ; but for him, he is not within the reach-of your mighty Power tho’ Millions of Waves divide us, yet my Faith, my Truth, and Love, muft and fhall preferve me inviolably his. You ought to know, ( reply*d hey Fnore entagedy this is not the Language of a Slave, who can preferve no Faith, no Oath, but as your Monarch pleafeS > and if we fhall think fit to lofe . the thought that your virgin Rofe has been the fpoil of a wretched Inferiour, with Gratitude and fub-milftve Joy you ought to meet by condefcend-ing Love. But oh, reply*d /, by Education and Notions different, I am taught, that no Fear, no Slavery, Tortures, nor Death itfelf, will be an excuSe for breaking through the bounds my Religion prefcribes, where Adultery is in the foremoft Rank of heinous deadly Grimes,
Murder
(faid jirangely fe
Yuptmg me, imth an Air mock my eafy Compliance j but filence your Complaints, or Death in all his frightful Forms fiiall Surround you, nor dare to damp my Joys with a Sigh, left we ourfelves (taking up a Ihort Scy miter that lay at the head of his Bed)
with
6il
The Prude,
with Wrath fevere make this unftain’d Weapon drunk with thy Blood. To which, firm, ly fix’d on my Purpofe, and enraged at his Tyranny, I reply’d, I cannot help it, I will not hold a Ihort precarious Life by a Crime fo deadly, hourly rack’d with the flings of ; Guilt, attended befides by a thouSand reftlefs Fears of Death, and you. And perceiving him ready to heave his Arm, and give the blow, encouraged by Some extraordinary Power, I went on, faying. Strike------thou canft
but triumph o’er my inanimated Clay— whilft I, fwift as the Sun’s refulgent Beams, fhall
mount to celellial Happinefs.-----More exaf-
perated at theBoldnefs of thefe laft Words—he ftruck the Dagger with fuch force, that the
• bright Metal Sparkled in my Eyes.------But
Heaven ftill guarding and preferving me, ordain’d it fb, that the Weapon Aiding from my Breaft, with all its force went into my right
of which you have often feen the
He had no fooner given this rafli Blow, but repenting, with a ftamp fummon’d his Attendants; and perceiving the Blood to flow from the Wound, with relenting Pity {loop’d, and flopt it w ith his Hand ,* Saying, What haft thou made me do, thou rebellious, but ftill lovely Fair ? — And turning to his people, order’d them to fly with their fwifteft Speed for the Phyfician; adding, he had de-ftroy’d more Worth than his Kingdom could
and
Wound; all the
recompence. And perceiving me faint yneafy at the drefling my while forcing me to reft by him, he ftrove to comfort Tne,4)y repeated AfTurances of never ?nor9 giving any caufc to fear the like
Danger.
rheV
6$
Danger. And bidding my Uncle to be called, who came with me to the Court, he Said to him, on his appearing. Where, and how, came you by this excellent Wonder of her Sex ? See, with what Unconcern (he dares Death, which you and I once trembled at the thoughts of, whilft her undaunted Soul braves him with all his Terrors : and yet every female
Grace fits.triumphant in her Eyes.-------Ha 1
(purfued he) what an unequal SoftneSs is there ! how could my more than barbarous Rage hurt fuch unparalleEd Beauty ? Then turning to my Uncle, he Said, Teach me, EmerVLemla^ inftrudi: me how to warm that frozen Heart with Transports equal to thofe her Eyes in-fpire ! Oh learn me all your Nation’s Soothing Arts, by which they captivate the Fair and in return. Rule and Empire Shall be thine. Revenge and Death Shall be in thy pov/er, thou Shalt be Abdullas Self.
I heard all this, and faw his Officer with aftive Diligence, equal to his unbounded Expreffion of Love, endeavour to reftore my drooping Spirits, and heal my'Wound i whilft my Unclej who with anxious Soul had waited without, impatient to know the Event, obey’d the King’s Summons with pale Fear in his Looks 5 which being difperSed by what he Said to him, he drew nearer the Throne with more confidence. After having paid the uSual Homage, he began to addreSs him in the fol-

lowing manner
-Since your royal Good-
neSs has commanded me to Speak, I will pre fume to deliver with Modefty and Candour my humble Opinion; efteeming myfelf bleft, beyond Length of Days or Riches, if I am infpired
P A R T II. K.	with
Vhe Prude.
Moment
my dread Sovereign.------Tho'’ I could not help
fmiling, with an amazed Contempt at this extreme Flattery in my Uncle; yet it was plain and artlefs, to what afterwards I perceived was addrefled to me, being So fortunately advanced, as they thought, to the King’s favour. But, having ended his long Preamble of Duty and profound ReSped, he began to acquaint
I w'as his Neice, and by what
and found to be fuch :
Majefly
I
means i w'as Saved,
Adding, that the Men of his Country,, being too indulgent to our Sex’s Charms, the greateft amongll them (the Monarch not excepted } fought and obtained our Love only by fub-miflive means; w^hich indeed had this happy effed, that our Hearts being fecured by thofe mild Indearments, it more bound our gentle Natures to ftrid Fidelity, than Guards, Watches, and Confinement :
^ularly as for mySelf, tho’ his impartial Eyes were unfenlible of Love, yet he could not help confeding my Charms fuperiour to moft, ( So great was his Flattery !) Not but the Women of his Nation furpaSs all Nature in th
And more parti-
6
/
general efieem, a Sweet harmonious Juftnefs regulating their Features, with Complexions fair as the falling Snow, inlivenM with as beauteous a Tindure of Red, as the blufhing Morn, without that Separate Settled FixedneSs of too often the fading Lilly and languid RoSe, lefs inviting in our neighbouring Nations: Adding, our Sprightly Air and modeft Mein, was inex-preffibly agreeable, neither tainted with an affeded Gaiety, nor demurely formal. It would have made any one leSs interelled than mySelf,
Smile
^he P Rti D EJ
fmile to fee with what Gravity he uttered all this ; as if it had been Some weighty Advicej^ in which the Preservation of the Kingdom was concerned. However? the Kin^, thus taught to Woo, by a thoufand compIaiSant Arts, began to footh my Pride, the fatal Foible of our Sex^ And indeed fo great was the Ingenuity and Paffion of that Monarch, that I believe^ had not my Soul been tooftrongly fix’d to my faithleSs inconftant Bellvik, I could not have refilled all
But
when I was fo happy, to find a certain Pro tedlion in my TJncVs Friendlhip, fo great a Solitude rather increafing my Difcontent for the injurious Ufage of my Husband, I was fo happy to make Devotion my Refuge: It was

the tender Obligements of that Prince
^fued
infpired me with Fortitude to bafHe the Terrors of Death, with fo much Contempt, and refill a not difagreeable MonarcVs Addrefi'es, with the Power and Honour that attended it.
The I^ing, being prevailed’ on to leave me to ini' repofe, I was convey’d to the next Apartment; and Emer-Zemla flaying with him, he renew’d his Sollicitation, with extravagant PromiSes, if he could win me to a Compliance; not Omitting to infinuate Threats, if I continued obllinate ; which my Uncle did not fail to enforce, with ail the difmai Difafters that mull attend my flill refilling. But unmoved, I told him^ I was refolved to wait and bear with Patience^ W'^hatever Heaven was pleafed to allot; retortin fo fharply on him, his want of CouragCj and Vertue, that vanquish’d whth fliame, he left: purfumg me. WhiHl my Wound mending but flowly, I perpetually had the King^s company^
K2
The?RUD£
pretence of it, did not And indeed in thoSe Hout$
when Sleep, or the free me from him. he fhow’d fo excellent an Underftanding, wifh fuch a Noblenefs of Mind, that I began, al-moft, to fear him as a dangerous Lover, my Averlion now ceahng, which at firSL proved no Small Armour to the Reliftance I made. But in the mean time, all that had pafsM flying to the Queeris Ears, fhe was ftruck with Such an implacable Jealoufy, that Ihe reSolved my death it being a very wrong Notion that we have, to imagine the AfianLzdHts arefopaflive concerning their Husband’s divided Love.
It s true, any PleaSure en pajfant with other Women of the Seraglio ( who pay the Wife the Refped: of a Miftrefs ) they encourage, as we would a female Friend to make a third at Cards, or any other Amufement j but when once they imagine or apprehend they are like to gain a fuperiour Intereft in the Hearts of their Husbands, they feel as many lively Pangs, and racking Tortures, outrageoufly oppofing, or flily undermining, as the moft exafperated Italian Revenge can invent j their Paflions being more violent than ours, take deeper root. Of this Stamp was the Queen, who in her Youth had been too buSy in Politicks, not to be tainted with a Subtle ill Principle in moft of herDefigns. The King’s high Spirit had curb’d her in all State-Matters, lince the death of her Father i yet he treated her with great ReSped, as the Source from whence his Honours Sprung: except in Love-Affairs, it Seems he had often caufed her to be violently uneafy, tho’ never any thing comparable to this Adventure of mine, which She determined to get rid of, by
poifoning
‘The?
6q
poifoningme.
Having gained an Eunuch,
thtKing aflign’d to be one of my Attendants, to aid her in her Defign, the Dilh I drank Tea in, was poifon’d i when Providence So order’d it, that Cujhama by chance broke it, and my poor little Squirrel eating the Sugar out of the bottom, immediately grew lick and dizzy, and taking him in my Lap, he Soon, falling into ftrong ConvuHions, died. This fo alarm’d my Uncle, that he immediately carried it to the King; who prefently guefs’d from whence the Mifchief came: tho’, to be certain, the Eunuch was threatened with the Rack ; which to e-fcape, he confefs’d it was done at the Queens Soliicitation,—This waking the King*s care to preferve me for the future, moft of his Officers were difmilfed *, and thofe whom my Uncle could beft confide in, were placed about me in their Head. But my Wound mending apace, and the King growing more violent in his Sol-licitations, which my Uncle perceiving I intended to refill with my firll unalter’d Refo-lution, he, in earneft began to think of our E-fcape: and it fortunately happening that a Dutch VelSel was going to leave the Port, laden for Europe, he ordered it fo, as to agree for our Paflage; tho’ he was too much a Politician to let him know he ran the danger of carrying away Emer-Zemla and myfelf, only making the Mailer of the Ship believe we were Merchants, who were afraid of being taken up about Some Mifmanagements in the Duties of Trade. He contrived that the Ship Should Sail in the Morning out of the Port, and dropping down about ten Leagues, they Should lie by within one of the Palaces where the King then
refid ed.
70
’The Prude.
relided, and fend their Boat to an unfrequented
part of (:he Shore, to wait for us.
I thought, faid Emella, I Should have gone wild with Joy, when ray Unde brought me this pleafing News i charging me at the fame time to foften my Behaviour to the King, to prevent Sufpicion: which I did fo artfully, that AbdaUa, charmed with the Change, talkM all in the Language of Raptures, flaying with roe fo long, that I was forced to pretend a Fit of Illnefs to be rid of him. Tho’ I cannot help owning, when I refleded on the uncommon Generolity with which he treated me, conlidering the Tyranny which they exercife in thofe Parts over our wretched Sex, when thrown unfortunately in their power, that I could not fee him leave me, as I imagin’d, for ever, without being touch’d with fome Re-——■ I immediately prepared for our De-
parture, my cautious Unde not fuflering us to quit the Palace till he was firfl fure rhat the Long-Boat waited for us on the Shore; and then pretending fome Bufinefs of Confe-quence, I and Cufhama followed him in the Habit of inferiour Eunuchs., that tend in lower Offices about the Ccurt^ We got off unfufpec ted, and fwift as our Horfes could carry us, made to the Boat j where a Chriftian, in whofe Fidelity my Unde knew he might confide, expeAed our coming, with mofl of our Trea*^ fure; and without difficulty getting to the Ship, with flying Sails we made from Shore.
Thus Providence allotted, when I leaft ex-peded, my Deliverance; for who could have thought, that Emelia Should in lefs than a Month be failing to her native Country, when
fhe received that; haughty Command to be
*lToe Prude.
71
brought to the Seraglio, from whence non^ e'er depart till Death has Seal'd their fatal
Mandate ?----Or who could have imagin'd
that I Should return laden home, Miftrefs of immenfe Wealth, that faw me leave my native Country, forlorn, abandon'd, and defti-tute of Friends, or wherewithal to Support me ? Thus, whilft celellial Virtue is our Guide, let none diftruft the alLliberal Hand of Providence, whofe Mercy defcends to relieve the poor, the miferable offending Sinner.
When we loft fight of Gohonda, the Fears which had fo vifibly poflefled my Uncle whilft he was adive about his efcaping, (that had not Love blinded the Kin^s Penetration, he might eafily have obferved the violent Agitation of his Soul through his Vifage) difper-ifing as we drew towards Europey he frankly owning his Weaknefs, took me into his Arms, and faid. My deareft Ncice, I acknowledge it is to you I owe the now joyful Hope of feeing again my Country, join'd with the Happinels, that I have it in my power to re-compence fo near, fo valuable a Relation, according to her Merit j who has fhow'd me the exalted difference between a fteddy Perfe-verance, when attack'd by imminent tempting Dangers, and only poorly wifhing or defiring to do it: For even thofe who have no natural Turn or Impulfe to VicBy often by an irre-folute Indolence Submit, fondly flattering them-felves, that the Force and Necefliry will palliate the Crime. I mention this, jaid E-melia, to Show you how much he approved of that very Confiancy which his vieak Fears would have lhaken. Nor was he lefs generous
than
71
Fhe Prude.
\
than his PromiSe i we no Sooner arriving at Venice, than diSpoIing of moll of his Jewels to advantage, he divided his Wealth equally between us, from that moment making me intire MiftreSs of half, independent of him. Nor did he forget the Chriftian Servant that affift-ed in our EScape, or the Dutch Mailer ; rewarding him as liberally, as if he had known the Rifquc he had run of carrying from Got-conda, Emer~Zemla and Emelia.
I will not trouble you, faid this fair Hifto~ rian, with the Names of the Countries, or the delightful Journeys which we made throughout moll parts of Europe, till our Arrival in our dear native Country : Where we had not been long landed, before my Uncle entering into a ferious Difeourfe on the Incidents of my pall Life, faid to me, Neice, tho’ I perceive you would difguiSe in Silence the Anguilh of your Soul, your perfidious Husband has Hill too great an afeendant o’er your Heart, for you to have any true Joy ip Life i which fills me with Fears that this one Weaknefs may deftroy all the Happinefs Providence has liberally pointed out to you. Confefs {faid he, percei-nting the rifng Blupes guiltily acknowledging the Truth) are not your Secret WiShes for a Reconciliation ? To which I anSwered, (confounded at his quick Perception of my Folly) I cannot well tell you how my Heart is diS-poSed toward him whom I violently Love and Mate at once ; and fear, thofe oppolite Pallions, in fpight of Resolution and AbSence, will never ceaSe tormenting the RepoSe I fain would find by Indifference and InSenlSbility *. But this. Sir, I alfure you, (added /) I Shall never
Hoop
Prude. 75
floop to a thought of Reconciliation without (what, alas i is impoflible ) the finding him fuch as I at firft imagin’d him, when Gratitude pleaded with all his other Charms for the Surrender of my Heart. Not but I own I wifh to triumph over him, by letting him fee how much the injur’d abandon’d	has been the
particular Care of Providence; which perhaps may make him dread the contrary Effe<^ on his Perjuries. Ha ! ( cry*d my XJncky on hearing this) you have touch’d the very Point i I fear and tremble for you : Your Cufiofity, (furfued he) has already made you enquire whether he has yet difpofed of himfelf to another, and now you know your Fortune may make him defire you on the Score of Intereft, and afSerc his Right, who before deny’d you, with So unparallel’d a BafeneSs, that I wonder how it’s poffible a Woman of your SenSe and Spirit can entertain a thought of remaining Love for the word of Men; who work’d on your AunKs and your WeakneSs, to become a Prey to his Defires ; which after having fully Satiated, without any SenSe of Juflice or Honour, or one remorfeful Thought of Pity, the laft feeble Remain of Love, did an Adion that ought to make you think of him only with Deteftar
tion and Horror.---For what HappineSs can
you ever exped, or what Confidence can you have in him, in whoSe moft endearing CarefSes you fear Deceit j who when moft he Seem’d to love, was under-hand ftriking the blows of deadly Hate,— and whofe Principle you know has dared to break through the moft Solemn
and Sacred Ties on Earth.-----No, Emelia,
(mtimied he ) exert yourSelf, and by a noble
L	ReSent


74
‘The Prude.
Refentment, refolve to hate and think no more of him ; And as I believe you are Safer whilft out of his Knowledge, change your Name, and as your State is truly that of a Widow,wear
the Title of one
and let us chuSe the moft
pieaSant Part of the Country, to paSs, I hope, our happy Days.——■ The Court and City being the only Places BeUvHe can banilh you from, vanquish all Thoughts of appearing
there:------which, I take it, will be very eafy
for you to do, whom I have found more inclined to be diverted with Reading than Conversation. Nor put it any more in BelhiPs power to create you new Misfortunes, which by wilfully running into, you cannot hope Providence will again appear So wonderfully in your behalf j having no excuSe for loving him, who ought to be abhorr’d.
TheSe ReaSons, join’d with my VncU*s Intreaties, cauSed me to Subdue all Thoughts of feeing BeJi’vile j and I retired with him, to the Seat he had purchaSed, where I have ever fince refided. And
his
Vncky who at more ftrongly laying has
my
Death made me his Heir, the fame Injun6lion on me, has prevented, more than my Refentment, the fond DeSire I have ftill of once more feeing BeU'nile^ and running perhaps into a fecond Ruin: For Such is my Weaknefs, that neither Abfence nor all my mighty Wrongs can rafe the firft charming Idea from my Soul. This Folly I have fuffer’d to prevail fo far on me, that learning he went abroad on publick Affairs, I wrote a Letter as if redding in that Place j only telling him, I was ftill living, and bidding him beware of
entering into another Marriage, to add to his
Crimes:
Prude.
75
Crimes: For tho’ I had been So barbaroufly ufed by him, I had preferred myfelf, withouc retorting his Injuries, by any other way, but by being concealed eternally from him. This I did, not to have reproach on myfelf, fhould he be guilty of fo great a Crime.
And in this perplex’d State I have continued ever lincCj wifhing to fee him, and that he may find an excufe for all hehasdonei yet not daring to do it: Which is now more than ever increafed, by feeing that faithlefs Charmer, in the Drawing-Room, when laft we were there. But alas ! how chang’d from the Young, the Gay, Inimitable BeUvile! The inchant-ing Softnefs of his Eyes skilled no lefs than his Tongue in the perfuafive Arts of Love, now fternly moved, regardiefs of the Fair j whilft his contraded Brows feem’d puzzled in hatching dark Schemes of State. Yet tho* his Complexion was fallow’d, and his eafy Air and fine-turned Limbs grown into a heavy Corpulency j ftill methoughts there appear’d a noble Grandeur in his Mien.---Ah! Hea-
vens, purfued Emelia, why have you given fo many outward Excellencies, where there is fo little Worth lodg’d within ? And why am
I doom’d to love...—to doat— w'here all
Virtue is wanting, that fhould give Approve-ance to my fond Paflion ? But (proceeded that Lady) unable to bear the fight of him, w'ith trembling Limbs I withdrew, complaining to you and EUfinday that I was feiz’d with a fudden Diforder. This, with what has fince happen’d to you on Lyfander*s fcore, made me refolve to leave the Town, and .try, by retreating, to efcape the Snares of Love ? which
L 2	may
7<5
The P R u D E.
\
may again intrap me, and make you acquainted with Sorrows like thoSe I have but poorly painted the leaft Part of.
Emelia had Scarce finished thefe Words> when they perceived a Chariot with two Gentlemen and their Equipage in Mourning pafs by them, and flop at Beligrand.s CosLCK But how different were the Paffions of their Souls, tho’ both habited in the Weeds of Grief! The one being Stamrius^ lately freed from the galling Chains of Matrimony ,* and the other, the generous enamoured Marcander, who was pierced with a Sorrow of a deeper Strain than outward Mourn'ing could exprefs,
Beligrand and the Gentlemen knowing each Other, and underftanding they were to travel the fame Road, tho* Marcander and Stanorms fwift Horfes Show*d they intended to reach a further length; yet they were eafily perSuaded to halt at Bellgrand.'Sy and the Ladies intended Stage *, especially Stamnus, who by this had learnt from ElijtndVs longing Eyes—that a pleafing Duty wa5 expeded from him by that Fair, whofe eager Soul was already contriving a Means to polfefs Joys more Solid, and Suiting better with her warm Nature, than Such as her profeSs’d Aufferity admitted of: To accomplish which, they had no Sooner entred the Inn, but her excellent Engine, Stamjja, took care to confult with him, jn order to have their Chambers joinM j which being done,
before Supper was brought. Some of BeUgrand[s People having rode before, to get it prepared.
But now Fate began to turn the Scales ' Elijlnda^ who was not much longer to
triumph
they waited not long
m
/
Tl7e P
77
triumph in her dilTembled Hypocrify and Wickednefs ; for the beauteous Beliamira, like the refulgent Sun, darkening all her feebler Rays, ftruck the amazed Stamrius with too many pointed Charms, not to yield himSelf her immediate Victim, whofe nice Difcernment of the Sex’s Foibles, hitherto had prevented all Efteem. But here Reafon, commonly the Foe of Love, join’d his united Force, in acknowledging her faultlelly fair,—who was indeed free from all the little affeded Vanities of her Sex ;---
j----asToIfingsof the Head, Shrugs, and
fwimming indolent Airs, which oftener create Ridicule, than gain the fought-for Admiration. Whilft Beliamira, inSenlible of her own Per-fedion ; made all her Charms appear the inimitable Work of Nature : and tho’ Stamrius found his amorous Soul loft in this delightful Labyrinth of Beauty, yet he did not fail to call his ufual Afliftant, ill-natured Obfervauon, to his aid i to find if the Mind inhabiting within, was worthy of fo fair a Lodgment, which now feeble Art made all her Charms return with double force : A' becoming Modefty, nicely placed between an extreme BalhfuIneSs and affuming Boldnefs, accompanying all her Adions and Words; which tho* few, exprefs’d her Thoughts fo excellently juft and pleafing, that he began as eagerly to defire ' an acquaintance with her Mind, as her outward Form.
But tho’ his ravifh’d Eyes wifh’d eternally to be fix’d on that lovely Objed, yet he often
Woman
EUlindi
j
But
The Prude.
But Supper being ended, the difconfolatc
Marc'ander
who, blind to Beauty, and infenfible to Joy, or the Pleafures of Conversation, chuSes, by retiring alone, to indulge
Love, Grief and Defpair, which had been his
inseparable Companions, ever fince the death of the lovely Morenia ; when it happened that Emelia calling her Eyes towards his Seat, and perceiving Something glitter* pointed to a Servant to reach it her; which being done. She perceived it was a Pidure in miniature, repre* feiiting a Huntrefs, the Beauty of which, extremely charming her. She Said, as She Surveyed it, How juft a Symmetry are in theSe Features! Howexadly proportioned are theSe fine-turnd Limbs !—What a Spriehtlv SweetneSs is in thbSe Eyes I
^---How many agreeable Smiles
play about her Mouth!—-Sure (furfuedfbe) the Original is an unequaPd Beauty ; or elfe the Painter^s Imagination has excelPd all I have yet beheld of Nature !— -^—Stamrius, who, knew the Fair-one this Piece but faintly repre* fertted, replyM, he was convinced by what
Emelia had Said, She muft be a Stranger to the
who had all the varying Charms of her whole Sex centered in herSelf; each Adion and changing Look, adding to her Beauty, new and inimitable Graces j an^in-chanting SoftneSs often in her Eyes in a moment would Succeed the laughing Deities, that before reVfcPd there in wanton Mirth : Yet, when Anger had animated them, the Sparkling Rays would flafli around with Such a beauteous Majefty, as would awe a-nd make you yield yourSelf the Offender, tho* eonfcious the fault was her^s.'",-""" Nor was her Genius inferiour,
tho*
‘Ihe Pru de.
79
tho’ lefs regular, than the Excellences of her Perfon j there being Something in it too exalted, too daring, and too full of fire, for the Timidity, and almoft dull Discretion, with which the Fair ought to guard their Chaftity.
Elijinda, flung at the Warmth with which Stamrius defcribed all thefe Perfedions, hallily reached her Hand to view the Pidure j which fhe had no fooner done, but with a pleafed Spight fhe faid. If I miftake not, the Lady which this inchanting Piece reprefents, was MorentUy the Daughter of the Baron de ^ and the adulterous divorc’d Wife of the injured Count Vilayne, whofe Soul and Charader is as abominably deformed, as her Perfon might be
efleemed otherwife.------—No doubt but her
pious Abhorrence of that odious Vice—might have caufed her to have run a greater length, had file not remember’d Stamrius wasprefent; who taking her up, faid. Madam, you have too rigidly trod the Paths of Honour and Vertue, to be a Judge of the offending Moreniay whom I would not pretend to excufe in this Company, tho® I would a little foften her Faults, and put her in a light that might difcover fome Sparks of Vertue; which, through the black Cloud of criminal Love, might move your pity, at the fame time that you blam’d the
Condud of this guilty Fair-one.-—-..To which
Emelia reply’d, I am already too much charm’d with this lovely Refemblance of the Lady, not to wifh her Adions as amiable, who certainly muff be attack’d with Temptations as much fuperiour to what our Sex often, but feebly refill, as I think her Charms furpafs all I
have feen ; And fince (added/he) you incline
fo
/

8o
Fhe Prude.
fo favourably to mention her Faults, methinksl
would hear them from Stamrius.-------Bellgrand
and the conquering Beliamira	their Re-
quefts with hers, EUfinda was forced to yield, and be the painful Hearer of Adventures fhe approved of only in Adion ; Tho’ after fome time, fired with Thoughts more elevated than thofe of empty Conversation, fhe withdrew; chiding Stamrius with her Eyes, for imploying the precious time in infipid Talk, while more pleafing Joys waited his Approach. But fo fickle is the Heart of Man, that he, who not many hours before Hop’d the Courfe of his Journey, Summon’d by her Charms, now found more 'pleafure in bearly gazing on Bell amir than all her rifled Beauties could equal. And her Abfence giving him greater Latitude to enjoy that Happinefs, he, to entertain the Company, began the Story of Morenia in the following manner.
Lhe lIiJiory of the Marquifs de Mon troviie, Morenia, and the Count Vi layne.

0 RE II ^ Father, the Baron de..
eat lying within a Mile of the Marquifs de Montrcvile s Caftle ; that will be revered in all Ages, for the great Aiffions of this young Hero’s Grandfire, whofe undaunted Courage, Fortitude and Loyalty, alone ftem’d and op-pofed, for a confiderable while, the rebellious Torrent of Confufion and Anarchy, that o’er-whelmed and devoured his bleeding Country ;
long
Fhe Prude.’
Sr
long fupporting his royal Mafler’s finking Caufoy and with him greatly fall, laden, as he juftly termM it, with never-dying Honour si Who, furfued Stanorius, (firM with a worthy Emulation, on making this little Mention of the great, the glorious Montromile} like him, would not rather nobly expire in the Service of their King and Country^ than linger on the coward, cold, Death-Bed of Nature ?
But as LovCy and not IVary is to be my pre-fent Theme, the young Marquifs Monmvile and his Sifters being infeparably inthecorapany of Morenidy by the intimacy of their two Families they had, even in their Infancy, fotender a Friendship for each other, that their childifh Endearments were often repeated to divert the Vifitors of each Family. The Marqtiifsy but two Years older than Morenidy never thought he had learn’d his Leffon, till he had firft taught it that young Lady j and when he was ungovernable and obftinate, if fhe was called to their Afliftance, fhe never fail’d to calm and bring him back to a Serene Compliance with his Duty. Thus, before they underftood the Name of Love, their Hearts were join’d in an innocent amiable Paftion for each other ; which their growing Years blowing to a more lively Flame, they thought to make it eternal, by the moft binding Vows that Love and they could invent, without any dread of Fortune’s oppofition. The Marquifs’s. Father having been long dead, they flatter’d themfelves, from the fraailnefs of Morenia^s Fortune, that when Montrovile Should come of Age, he nee4 but ask that lovely Lady of her Father, to obtain her.
V.
Part II.
M
But

Thhe Prude.
But Time’s flow Wings not flying fo fall as their Wiflies, the Lover had Scarce reach’d to the eighteenth Year of his Age, when the Dowager Marchionefs de Montrovik^ thinking it time for him to begin his Travels, had all things prepared before She acquainted him with it; and then, in terms too arbitrary, let him know her Defign, for him to think of ought but obeying her. Whatever reludancy he had for being thus cruelly divided from the innocent fweet Society of his adorable Morenia^ whom he vifited the next day with this unwelcome fatal News, I will not {{aid Stanorius ) pretend to relate all the Conversation that had paSs’d between theSe Lovers at parting ; tho’ I have heard mofi: of it mentioned by both : The amorous Marquifs^ by ten thouSand Oaths of eternal Fidelity, endeavoured to perSuade Morenia in his AbSence to perfill in the like; telling her, that tho’ he was forced by the rigour of his guardian Mother then to a Separation, yet nothing Should make him ceafe a moment to adore her ; that her lovely Image was too ftrongly imprinted in his Soul, for ought but Death to efface. Which to confirm, he Showed Morenia her own Pidure hanging at his Breaft i telling her, whilft abSent, on that alone he’d gaze: And preSentingher with his, defired it might Sometimes be look’d on, to put her in mind of her adoring Lover. KIoreniay however, reftrained by Modefty, no iefs charmed than he, with having Such a plea-fing ReSemblance of her inchanting Montroviky received it i and Said, Tho’ the Manner of my DreSs will not permit me to wear it, as you do
mine, yet till my Eyes are blefs’d in beholding
the
Fhe Prude.
the Original, to this I’ll pay my morning and evening Vifits, and do you remember the Hours I go to or rife from my Repofe, to this Effigy, as to yourfelf, I will unload the Ful-nefs of my Heart, my Faith, my eternal Gon*
ftancy.
'fued jbcy /peaking
you tell my Montroviki whilft he is faithful, no Force, no Violence, nor all the Charms of his conquering Sex, fhall create an inconftant Thought of ought but hirofelf.-him, purjuedflye, I will indeed { nia his, through every Difficulty.
Ihould he then at laft Be falSe!----'—The Vio-
lence with
Words
caufing the Blood to gufh from her Nofe, frightened with the Imagination that it was an ill O men, fhe faid. See my Lord, I confirm my Truth, and Faith, with my Blood; and
Montroviky in fpight of all his doubts of my Love, and his Vows of eternal Conftancy, will be falfe—--to the forlorn Morenia; who dwelling in Obfcurity, amidfl barren Rocks and folitary Woods, will be negleded and forgotten. Ah i (pur/ued that aimahle Fair-one ) how can I exped the faint Image of Morenia Should guard your Heart againft the feleded dazling Charms of Courts ? There fome victorious Happy-one will foon drive every Thought, every Idea of haplefs me thence. ■ - But the lovely Marquifs, by repeated AfTurances, dii* perfing her Fears, the Lovers having firft contrived to write to each other without being difcover’d, were at laft forced to Separate. He began his Jouruey, his Thoughts fully poffeSs’d with the Chariiis of that inimitably conflant
M z	Lady,

Prude.
Lady, who reSoIved to fall a Martyr to Love^ rather than be falSe to her Montro^ile.
But wliilft;the young Lady was fecurjy wrapt in the delightful Ideas of Love, and
' her engaging Lover j the Baron de.___.her
Father, having wafted his Eftate confidorably in the late Civil Wars of the Empire, had few other hopes of advancing Morenia in Marriage Suitable to her Birth, but by her extraordinary Beauty: Which I believe, Ladies, (purfued , Stanorius) you’re fenlible is not all that is re-quifite in this Age, tho’ our firft Parent thought it an Equivalent for the Empire of the Globe, with which he endowed his Confort: Hor would Morenid.s Stars have been much lefs aufpicious, had not Love, like the fedu-cing Serpent, fatally wrought her Ruin. It happening that Villayne, who is efteem’d one qf the richeft Counts of the Empre, w'as one Morning at the Diverlion of Hawking; o. i.2^-vourite one flying a-crofs the Baron’s Grounds, and riot returning at the Falconer’s Call, they imagin’d it was perched on a Tree, perhaps, in the Garden: which caufed Villayne and his company to go to the Barons, w’ho waited on them to the Garden, where they found the Hawk perched on Morenia*s Arm. Villayne charmed with the inexpreflible Beauty of that young Lady, and furprized at the Accident of the Hawk, began fondly to imagine ( being fuperftitioufly' Religious } that the Bird, direded by Providence, had pointed out to him Morenia for a Wife; tho’ afterwards he was convinced, this fancied aufpicious Flight of the HaWk was to occafion none of that flatter’d Happinefs, * unlefs the extraordinary
Patience
The P R u D E.^
85
Patience with which he fuftained her Injuries, were to qualify him for a more elevated one hereafter. However, ftaying Dinner at the Barones Intreaty, he did not depart thence till he had propofed the Marriage j which was too much for the advantage of Morenia, not to be joyfully accepted by her Father^ without once consulting whether his Daughter could love this future Husband; Which, alas! (he was fo far from pretending, that with a Courage unufual in one of her Sex and Youth, fhe Ilrove by Denials, Tears, and Intreaties, to move her obdurate Father from endeavouring this Match. But in vain ; he Spurn’d her from him weeping, and when She perlifted in refuling to wed Villayue^ he Swore to turn her forth a wandering Vagabond. And finding neither his ftern Commands, nor her Mother’s Softer Soothings, could work on her unhappy Conftancy ; the inexorable Baron-w'ho, from the tender Friendship of their Infancy, did not want to guefs the too engaging Marquifs the entire Caufe of this Averfion to Villayne., took a moft inhuman Refolution, of having her lock’d up without either Light or Food till fhe was brought to conSent. And tho* he formerly, by no figns of Diflike, Suffer’d Morenia by all manner of uncontrouled Opportunities to exert her Charms on Montro-•vile ; yet now he refolv’d not to flip So vaftly favourable ,an Offer, as the Comtes, only for the wavering hopes of Youth’s inconftant Love.
Morenia three Days endured this painful Faft, but at length Nature each moment preying on her for Relief, fhe at laft thought and fix’d on a ftrange Refolution, to eafe her
prefent
^6
The P R tj D E.
prefent intolerable Sufferings, and Hill pre-Serve her Faith inviolable to her beloved Mon-trcvile.
No Sooner had She determined what to do, but with Looks as chearful as her Soul was otherwise. She Submitted to her F^rmxWiilj whilft the penetrating Father, Surprized at her outward Gaiety and Sudden Compliance, had her ftridly w'atch’d till the Ceremonies
Maid
( purfueI
Where
make mention of a very Surprizing Scene between her and the County thoI nothing that will be offenfive to your tender Ears.——This wretched Bride, or rather Vidim, no Sooner perceiving Vidayne to make the approaches of an Simot-oxxs Bridegromy hxit throwing herSelf out of the Bed, fell at his Feet, which She bedewing with her Tears, Said, Oh my Lord, if you are not more than greatly Good, More-nia is the moft detedable, perjured, and the miSerablell of Women ! Oh, purfued this love-ly Hyprocritey what Shall I do ! inftrudf me all ye Powers, to'move his virtuous Heart ,* and you great Patronefs, whoSe Vengeance elSe nruft fall on my Perjuries, inSpire him to have Mercy^ to Save me from a Crime my Nature Shudders an and what I would fain by Death prevent. The Count, who is of a DiSpoIition Soft as Summer’s eentieft Winds, could not be-
M
TenderneSs
Nature j bidding her proceed in Terms that made her think her Arts half SucceSsful: And that young Deceiver knowing Villayne^s Weakness
Fhe P R u D E.
liiefs lay (if I may call it fuch ) in being extremely bigotted to Religion, flie made him believe that in her Zeal to the Virgin, (he had devoted fome time of Youth to that great Pa-tronefs by a Vow of Chaftity, which was not yet expired. The pious Count, on hearing this, however pleafed he was to find he was like to be blefsM with a Wife as religioully zealous as himSelf; could not forbear Sighing when he asked, how long it would be e’er the Expiration of it : which that Subtle Fair-one fix’d to the time of Montrovile*s coming of Age. And thus, infiead of bridal Joys, by Moreuid.s Tears, and the Face of Devotion, the Count complaifantly left the Bed, and fpenc the Nights on the Floor, till he carry’d her home; where the Charms of her Wit and Dif-pofition, with her pretended Piety, gained So great an AScendant over him, that She and her Family became entirely MillreSs of his Eftate: Nay, So far did this Lady’s Gaiety work on his eafy Temper, that MomrovilPs Health was often drank by the Title of the Lady in the Hack Box; She making him believe, She had there the Pidure of one She knew he had a Re Sped for.
But to return to De Montrouile, neither the Charms of foreign Courts, nor yet the greater Foe to Love, Ahfenee, had power hitherto to Shake the Conftancy of this Lover; who eafily took the excufes She made, of her Father’s cruel Violence and Force, together with how ftrangely She had prevail’d on Villayne*s Weak-neSs— So that by repeated Letters, full of the tendereft ASfurances of Love, he caufed her to perfift in her unalterable Faith,^ and the long-
expeded
/
Ae.
88
Fhe Prude.
/
expefted Time by each drawifig nigh, the Husband no lefs wishing it, than the Lover, who was now arrived at his Caftle, in order to put his defign in execution ; where by an allifting Servant, who had formerly belonged to the Marquifs, and ever fince Morenias Marriage had been her particular Favourite, it was agreed llie Should fly from her Husband with the Marquifs to a diftant Town, and there by a Second Marriage and Confummation,together with her Precontrad. with MontYomhy they did not fear to baffle the Counts Pretences.
Whilft, unfortunately for this wretched Lady, a Letter from her, in which all this Scheme was laid, being carelefly by the Marquifs left in an upper Pocket, his treacherous Valet found it, and carried it to the Dowager Marchionef\ who being a Lady of admirable Spirit and good SenSe, had fo great an Authority in the Country, that She immediately confined the young Lover, and Sent Villayne the Letter. Which not being found above an Hour before the defign’d Flight, the unhappy Husband did not receive it till Morenia was fled : But learning from it what Road She took, he and his Friends Soon purfued and came within fight of her. Which when Morenia perceived, being an excellent Horfe-Woman, She turned up a Mountain fo fteep and narrow, as hardly to be palfable ; whilft her faithful Servant, unfortunately for him, being before, and her Huf-band’s Party hollowing to him, by Threats and Intreaties to ftop, which muft have prevented her going on ; but her Requeft being more powerful in begging him ftill to continue their
Flight, the unhappy Wretch w^as Shot dead
on
r
P R U D £
bn the fpot, his Horfe and Self So incumbering the Paflage, that, unable to pafs further, this undaunted Lady was feized by her Husband^ und his Friends j where, before them all, with a Refolution unterrifyM, Ihe declared herfelf the Wife of Montrovile j adding, how little in the three Years, he had deferred the Name of Husband.—The blufhing Count could not deny the Truth of this AlTertion, and the Hern Baron, being prefent, refumed the Authority of a Father, and forced her home, to prevent her going greater lengths on that unhappy fcore;
The Marchionefs being acquainted with all that had happened, and underftanding by Li-laym^s Confeffion, that Morenia was ftill a Virgin, and neither Ambition, nor the Manner of this Marriage pleafing her, ftie took hold of this very Secret, to ruin that ill-fated Lady in her Son’s efteem; and in a grave Difcourfe with him, inlinuated as 'K Vilayne had affirmed
him.- This
his Lady was then with wrought the Effebt fhe wifil’d : The Marquifs. cools in his Love, the Probability flaggers his Faith, the roving Delires of his Youth grow, uneafy by his Confinement, and his arbitrary Mother refolves not to give him liberty, ’till he is fecured from that unhappy Lady, for fear he fhould find the Truth, and relapfe to Love: In Short, by her well-inforced Reafons and this Deceit, file fo wrought on him, that in lefs than thirty days, he was married to a very agreeable Lady, that foon was to drive out the faint Remains of undone Morenia 5 who, all this while endured, unmoved, the Shock of her reproaching Parents and Friends Part II.	N	taunting
/
90 The Prudk
taunting Reflexions, with Ufage too fcverc to be mentioned. And when with reiterated Spight, they ftill rung in her Ears, the doleful Nell to Morenia of his Marriage, ftie has often vow’d fhe did not believe it, till confirmed by the negleXful Liberty they at length fufiered her to take. The Count making no offers of Reconciliation, and that wretched Lady, finding by all her Inquiries the fatal Confirmation of the Truth j yet did fhe not fuffer her great Spirit to bend to an abfolute t)efpair : till one day forlornly ilraying out alone, fhe perceived, from the Field Ihe was in, the Marquifsy only attended by his Domefticks, riding along a Road that join’d to it; and making towards him, Ihe called aloud to have him ftop: which he obeying, Ihe Said, My Lord, I am informed you are married, I want nothing but to be convinced from yourSelf——which before you fpeak, your Looks have fatisfied me of 5 they exprefs a Secret Shame and Guilt for what you have done, which however the bufy World may talk, Morenia can never feel on your Score. You know, my Lord, I did not give my Love unSought, and when I received your Vows, and returned them, you See no MiSery could make me break through the firft Engagement of my Heart,—-but you have done it-—^and I am now free, and will ftill be happy with Vilayne^ without bellowing one Thought on the perjured Montrovik. The confufion of the Marquifs, who by this had learn’d the Deceit of his Mother, with all that unhappy Lady had Suffered, cauSed him, without interruption, to hear her out: but then it was too late to begin his weak Vindication, Mormia. turning
from
»
Prude.
9r
from him, fled too fall away fop either his Calls or Purfuit to overtake her j fo that at lafl: the Marquifs^ like her, was forced to return home, and endeavour to drown the Remains of that Paflion in a deep Defpair.
Morenia. whole Soul was of a different turn to moft of her unhappy Sex, who are generally found to pine after the fickle Falfe-one, when his Defire is pall’d and fled, kept her Word, and from that Moment, never bellowed a Sigh or Thought on the inconftant Marquifs ; bending all her Thoughts and Wit to retrieve layne back. In order to which, fhe wrote a Letter, informing him, that not being able to break through her Vows, fhe had indeed im-pofed on hirn but whatever caufe fhe had had to complain of Afmrow/f’s Ingratitude, yet to him alone, fhe muft impute all her Miferies, whofe fatal Love interpofing, had occafioned her being abandon’d by alljthat was dear to her: and in moving diftrefsful Terms^ainting the USage fhe had received from her Parents, intreated him only to fend her to a Monallery^ there p confume the remainder of her unhappy days.
But tho’ that fair fubtle Lady wrote in this ihanner, fhe was too well acquainted with Vilayne’s Difpofition and unhappy Dotage, for her not to be fenfible, he could no fooner hear of Moreniah being in Grief and Diftrefs, defiring his Aid, but Love and foft Compaflion
would drive
Thought.
away every uneafy reSenting And as (he judged, the fond County
on receiving the Letter, flew to her Father’s, and entering her Chamber, let her know he came to give her her choice, either of a mona-ftick Life, or if fhe could be happy with him^
N	whofe
Prude.
whofe tender Love Ihe need not doubt, he would do all that was in his power to recom-pence the fatal LoSs he had occafioned. Mon-falling at his Feet, returnM him thanks 5 alluring him, all the Friendfhip Ihe had had for MontYonjile Ihould now be changed into a Juft Regard for the more valuable VilaynCy iince he was pleafed fo generoufly to pardon iWhat was paft. Thus they were reconciled, and in lefs than a Year, Ihe made him a happy Father.
Stanonus at this making a full flop, Emelin taking up the Difcourfe, faid, I cannot perceive in ought that you have related concerning Mweriia^ but that Ihe much more de-ferves our Pity than Blame; tho^ her excefs of Love, purfued in fo violent a manner, with the Cdnfequences that attended it, Ihows us how fatal that Paflion is always to be, when not approved of by Friends: But Stamrius^ \yho had	Atanijfa	‘ "
fome'tirne
and leaning behind Emelid.s Chair, with reproaching Eyes chide his idle Loitering, whilfi: EUjlnda and other fort of Joys waited—replying to	faid. Could
I here draw a Curtain, and conceal a blacker Scene that is Hill behind; fhe would much rather, in my Opinion, deferve immortal Ap-
provance than any Cenfure.----But lince,
he, you’re inclined to have Compaffion on this unhappy Lady, I will leave you to-night in your prefent favourable Thoughts, perceiving Sleep already begins to take his Seat on lovely Bellawira^s Eyes, To which that
young Lady anfwered, he had millook, for fhe
had
P R U D E.
•T
9?
had been all Attention; but Enielia and Belh grand thinking Stamrius, tired by this tedious Relation, was willing to defer it, took this occafion to invite him to make a Halt in his Journey, and pafs a Day or two at Emelians : Which, for feveral plealing Reafons, he accepted with a becoming Complaifance, knowing neither he nor Marcander had any extraordinary Bulinefs to prevent that Happinefs. And all withdrawing to Reft, what fell out after, is referved to the Third Part.
«
“ithe End of the Second Part^

r
C
\ -
■± . /■

X.
■A
Lately Puhlijhed.
4	.	•	•	'	' f
The masqueraders •: m
Fatal Cmiojity. Being the Secret Hif-tory of a late Amour. The Third Edition.
'	( Pyke is)
The FATAL SECRET: or Co«.
flamy in Diftrefs. The Second Edition.
( Price IS.)
5. The SURPRIZE: or Confiancy Re-
’Warded. ( Price i s. ) .
4. The ARRAGONIAN Q_UEEN
A Secret Hiflory. The Second Edition.
.	( Price IS.)

j. BATH-INTRIGUES: /«/»ar Letten
to a Friend in LONDON, The Second Edition. ( Price I r.)

\


THE
►
R
U


A
• 'cr,
9
>
PART III. and Laft.
(Price i s. 6 d.)
/
/
yufl puhlijlo I iri two Parts^ the ^th Edition ofy
The M ASQ.UE R A D E R S, or Fatal
Curiosity : Being the Secret Hiftory of a Late Amour.	k
I
What guards the Purity of melting Maidsy In Courtly Balls, and mid-night Mafquerades; S^e from the treacherous Friend, and daring Sparky LheGlance hy Day, and Whifper in the Dark i When kind Occajionprompts their warm Defires When Mufick foftens, and when Dancing fires !
Pope.
K
Printed for J. Roberts, in Warwick-Lam, Price 2 s. Where may be had the Third Edition of, Bath Intrigues. In Four Letters to a F/iend in London. Price i s.






^*-

- •-•4 -^C.-.	-.

t
'4
j
I
•/
»
I
4#:
t
f
r
i
f
.t
•s.
X
%
(
f
*
I *
i
?


►-	^ “V -V *
^ %
1.	< 	J	\
• dk % s J %	m ■%. ? « *	) ;, . -r-i^*>hv'^;i- -v-.*■;- -vj- . . • • ■** '■■ ir:
* >	t! r V	
f
, ■<
•1.
y. ,	-T^ ^ - -	< ' ~J-
		
’*jS^	^ -br	T«i^
		
%' ■ S0	"% .	T » asr<
		*•
	
	• «* « *• >*
i *V ■T’	
	-fM
	fA
	J




(
4.
		$
		»
	1	e-
•	'	i
	/	
		■f
.		
	'	p
	:	.«
^ •		:
> i	•	*
rJ	'	A
'- •		
		} s
«	•	<r
		>
		»»
\		^J
	T \	
	..A	i
	>	i
		«
N
Ja
%
%
^■C-
%?-.
i'-
>r
«.
f
c.
•&
^t-
>
*
i.
Ir

Jr:
-'9
^ C T ii
C
r.
•.*
^S'
p
*■ • 5'-.	‘ "
* '♦
'4^
J-'.
t ‘
■ f'l
t ■
A
i	f'
■■U-	k
%	ti'
■t	1
}k
1	♦
A	!


V
	* ✓ •r
&	%
4lf	• •
	
^ \	
a, : 1 I	
	i
%	-'t
■•TV ■ .	' ,
	A'^.‘
riS^'irr?.->4r --^.-V- ••
B45S5S stil	r
5!
•r.
iiv
N
»
T
$
- -'.-.I*-..
.. I •< . ■
• - ifc*
■ * -■ V-. i
.__.Vr '-3^5
' >r‘if-^r-7:-: 1!
■•-.'t'-.r

TF-

d^AC---r'
•%


■
>
-f-

rf
" ■ 0 .
. 1
s
-.41^';
l•'■
f
. »»
>►
V -i

ll'i
i’*'® j
vict
r
»*
■X' .
. K
^1'
- .'r?
c * '•
k
'i'}
V VrS-.
■■■^' ' •
sru
: :j.
i'
T-
\
/
■0
w<
T
-V
4
X
-i
*
^ .
5
1!
7
t

V .
If:., f;
— 4-.
» •
>- V
^ •
I
*%■ * .
\ *'
I
•r
I

r
i.
&
	1
	
i	<
	■*
	
’-n '	m
V'V;	'
•iZ '	«•
’'m\A‘	-V
.« it
c
■ ^ •
F

h.\-
I
•■s.-
/

/ * \
•. _•- ♦ »
V	W, J-
r'. ft* <w
V	•
/
. V
\
\
o.
I
THE
U

PART
III

H E Company riling very early the
next Morning, met all at Break-
^ A ^
faft, in which they took but little Time; it being agreed they Should reach LmeUds before they dined. The Intimacy between Bellgrand and Marcan-derj caufed the firfh to mount with him in his Chariot; by which means Stanorius had the happinefs to be placed by the lovely Bella-mira; She, and Emelia^ with Elijtnda^ filling up the Coach.
Where Emelia foon made Stanorius fenfible. She was defirous to hear the reft of Morenia’s Adventures; telling him, her Concern for that Lady, had employM her Thoughts moft part of the Night, to find a Reafon why a Love fo
Part III.	B	valuable
Z	Lhe P R u D E.
valuable and conftant, Ihould be fo unfortunate ,* but I have remarked, furfued our ill-fated Sex’s Fidelity feldom meets with a better Reward. I am afraid. Madam, an-> fivePd Stanorius, you are going to attribute the Caufe of their Unhappinefs, to a Crime we are all fo generally tainted with, as will need an infinite deal of Wit and Skill to vindicate. If you mean, refumed fhe^ the Incon-ftancy of De MontroviUe^ you are not much miftaken ,* tho’ I fhould not have blamed him, if, after Morenid.s Marriage, he had banifh’d all Thoughts of that agreeable Lady; yet, methinks, when he had fuffer’d her to go fo great a Length, and make fuch an Eclat on his fcore, it was as difhonourable a Retreat, as the withdrawing one’s Forces from the Side we are ingag’d to, juft when they are going to begin the Battle with the Enemy. But, I have always obferved, continued Emelia, Men rather chufe by outrageous Anger, or fullen NegleD, to make the Forfaken fenfible of her loft Intereft, than with any Humanity endeavour to foften the Difappointment, though it Ihould coft them but a few plaulible Excufes. The Reafon, anfwePd Stanorius, ueith a Gaieij, is' very obvious ; for with how ill, how auk-ward an Air, muft a Lover look, after he has been telling his Miftrefs, in the Language of Tranfports, of her unequal, numberlefs Per-fedfions, and his eternal, paflionate Adorations ; that all thofe chimerical Imaginations, thofe pleafing Ideas, are vanifh’d ; and that, with his recover’d Senfes, Ihe appears now to him, meer Woman 1 — You h^vty faid Elilinda, I think, given a much better Reafon for treating

Fhe P Ru D E.
3
ing our Credulity with Contempt, than any we can find, to excufe the Folly of believing you. And as, purfued Jhe, I look on all who are called Lovers, to be tainted with vicious Inclinations, fo I think Difcourfes on that Subjedf, too near the Borders of Vice. Emelia^ who was not without Sufpicions of her being better acquainted with that amorous Deity, than this Aufterity feemM to admit, anfwed.d her, fhe could not yield, in the leaft, to her Opinion, who have, faid Jhe, Nature and Religion againft you in this Point; for, is not Love the great, the only Cement, between Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children ? And how many mifera-ble Marriages do we fee, for want of that amiable Paffion, to unite the jarring Strifes, and create a Harmony in their Adlions, de~ lightful to themfelves and Friends ? Not but I acknowledge, where Vertiie is wanting, criminal Inclination may as nigh refemble innocent Love, as Hypocrify too often wears Devotion^s lovely Nai;ne, (to fcreen the Bafe-nefs of their Willies.	'
Stanorius, imagining Emelia was piqued at Elijtndds over-anum a Modefty, tiitned the Difcourfe, by faying, he was afraid the Con-clufion of Moremds Story would too much con-{ixmEliJindam her auftereOpinion, and frighten the fair BeUamira from every Thought of that Paffion. On which, that young Lady faid. If he could infure her, it would have that Effe6f, fhe fhould never ceafe importuning him, till fhe had heard it; being very defirous to pre-ferve undifturb’d, the calm Content fhe now
enjoy’d : and Emelia feconding her Intre^-
B2	ties
\ ’

4
Fhe Prude.
ties, which Elijinda at laft yielding to, he acquainted them with it in the foilowing Words.
# # % ^ 0 # # # ^	^ ^ ^
/-
Cobitibmation ^Moreniah Hijiory.
THree Years had pafs’d, in which Morenla
made the Count a happy Father of two Sons, and a Daughter; the fond Husband, banilhing all Thoughts of De Montroville^ without Sufpicion, or Difcontent, enjoy’d a com-pleat Happinefs with his lovely Wife.
But, as you have been pleafed to obferve, Said Stanorius, addrefjing himfelf to Emelia, the Cbuntefs, not having Love like him, was unable’to return his boundlefs Flame; and Vil-lagne^ being more charm’d with the Amufe-ment of the Country, than the gay Diverlions of the City, Morenia was depriv’d by this means, of all that Pleafure there is to be met with I which might have bufied her idle Moments, and, perhaps, have preferv’d her from that fatal Paffion; which, together with a nearer View of others Miferies on that fcore, and the continual Scenes of Falfhood, Folly, Treachery, and Deftrudfion that attend it, might have made her run to her doating Husband’s Arms for Refuge.
But tho’ -the Coiind.s Houfe and Table were never without Company, they were generally too low, too mean for her elevated Genius: In this State her Heart was vacant, and ready to receive the hril pleafing Im predion, when her ill-fated Stars brought the Chevalier D*Avimont into that Country, with his La-
I
^Yy
‘The Prude.
5
(ly, whom he had lately married for her vaft Fortune, and intended to fix at his Seat, whilft himfelf defign’d to return, and enjoy the Pleasures of the Court, without having her too near a Spy on his ADions.
Butthofe Thoughts were all difpers’d, from the Moment he firft beheld the graceful More--Kz^whofe unequal Charms fiVd him withDefire to make that lovely Beauty fall a Vidfim to his viDorious Arts in Love ; for none ever had gain’d greater Renown that way, than the Chevalier DAvitnont. Many blafted Virgins loft their irretrievable Fame, and were ruin’d by him • and Widows, alfo, had rais’d him fuch Trophies, that he was ftiled the common Subduer of the Fair j who wanted no Charm that was requilite for thofe pleafing Conquefts : — An agreeable, eafy Air, Setting off his juft-proportion’d Limbs, which rofe to majeftick Heightwith Such a peculiar SoftneSs in his Eyes, as if the lovely Objedf, on which he gaz’d, had infpir’d him with all thofe amo-
tender Defires, which there Seem’d Sweetly to tempt. "Nor was his Tongue lefs skill’d than his Looks, in the Arts of Love:
A diverting Wit— a pleafing Infinuation — with a Submiffive ComplaiSance, and Admiration of their very Foibles^ as well as their Perfedlions • which firft gaining their Efteem, too Soon grew to Love.— But tho’ he knew how to create the greateft Paffion in the Breaft of the Fair, yet lie was inSenfible of it himfelf. That Vanity, the Pride of Subduing
rous
the Haughty, the till then Unconqer’d, was his only Aim ; and like cruel Victors, he never fail’d to leave Such Marks of Melancholy,
as
6
Fhe P R u D Ei
as might blaze around h’s Succefsthe innocent, and valuable, the confpicuous Merit, being the only ones he thought worthy to undo : He was of a Temper too covetous, to aflault the experience, the cunning, mercenary Dames. I often have heard him boaft, the Ruin of eminent Beauty, without any Ex-' pence j whilft others have been forc’d to la-vilh largely, for Favours almoft common. Nay, ill-natur’d Fame has not fpar’d, in malicious Whifpers, to report, that he, by an over-match a Skill at Cards, often left their Eftates in as defpicable a Condition as their Charafter.
Thus adorn’d with every Charm that could pleafe the Eye, in fpight of Reafon, Duty, and Vertue, Morenia did not long fuftain the AJfavItfhe fell in Love, and the Che^ valier was vidlorious.— Though I have heard hiju proteft, he never ufed more l^iligence, found more Difficulty, nor employ’d fo many fubtileWiles,as in the obtaining this Conqueft; tho’, alas! that Ladytoo unskill’d and innocent, to imagine, the Mask of Love could be worn by ought that did not feel his Povter \ whofe too fenlible knowledge of her Charms^ confpires againft her : the mighty Influence they had on the Count, caus’d her to think that alt Mankind was touch’d with the like ; and the Chevaliers lovely, languid Eyes, thus gazing, on her with Pleafure, made her fondly imagine her excellent Form was ftrongly imp refs’d in his Mind • whilft his Sighs, his Silence, whth his never to be repuls’d Importunities, Vows, and paflionate Adoration, quite defeated the weak Guards of her Vertue.
At
I
The P R u D E.
At firft, with Fears they warily Hole their Pleafures ; but,' by degrees, growing more bold, and Madam D' Jvimont perceiving her Husband’s Affedfions daily changing, from Negleft to Contempt, did not let her Jealoufy reft, till Ihe had found the Gaufe ; 'Which fhe reproaching him with in vainj and finding neither her Rage, Tears, Threats, nor Complaints, of any eftedt; but ftill return’d with indignant Scorn, without one Spark of Afte-dtion, or Tendernefs to eafe herj which, unable to bear, fhe made worfe, by ftruggling with it ^ and at laft, hopeleSs of other Re-drefs, fhe aloud complain’d to Villagne, how much they were both wrong’d: Which he, alas! was fo far from believing, that he treated her as a frantick, jealous, mad Woman, fpite-fully envious at the Counteffs exquifitely fu-perior Charms. Though on acquainting his Lady with the ridiculous Jealoufy of Madam TIAvitnont (as he term’d it) the Chevalier withdraws his frequent Vifits; and' to proceed with more Caution (as they vainly fancied) a Part of the Garden-wall was broke down, by feme pretended Accident, which he takes the advantage of, to enter at a Parlor-Window, and afeend up a pair of Stairs that came dire(5fly to Morenia^s Chamber; who too often, on the ExcuSe of Illnefs, lying a-part from the Countwhole Nights with D*-4-vimont: where, one Night, there happen’d a Palfage, which I will repeat to you, becaufe I believe it will more perfedfly acquaint you with the Countefs’s Temper, and undaunted Spirit, than my Defeription can: For, A-vimont having been but late a drinking, and
vifi-
\

The Prude.
vifitingAform^ inftead of home, when they were a-bed, She perceiving he had a Ring on his Finger, which in the hrft Ingagement of their Love, Ihe had given him, in exchange of another, which he had got made, of equal, if not fuperior Value, as Ihe then thought ^ andun-derflanding he had been in Company, Morenia fearM would know the Ring to have been hers, and, perhaps, inform her Husband of it, Having firfb upbraided his Carelelfnefs, Ihe attempted to get it from him, at the fame time telling him, fhe only deliFd it for fome time, that if any unlucky Story Ihould be told the County Ihe might have it to Ihow him. But he valuing the rich Prefent at too high a rate,
with it, there arofe a Quarrel be-; and at iaft, finding neither her Reafons, nor Intreaties could prevail, unus’d to be repuls’d in her Defires, Ihe began to proteft, that if he would not give it her, Ihe would call her Husband in to them, whom at that very Inftant Ihe heard coming up the Stairs. But the Chevalier, defpifing fo wild a Threat, perfifted in hisRefufal, which more inraging. her, Ihe rofe, and opening the Door, defired her Husband to enter; and at the fame time, fcreammg out with the violent Pain of her Head, Ihe begs him to fend the Lights away, pretending they added Torture to her Pains ;
to part tween them
inexprelTible which he immediately
complying to, Ihe returns to her Bed, (the Curtains clofely drawn) and defires him to Sit by it i when, after fome faint Groans, and other well-dilfembled Agonies, as if Ihe was extremely indifpofed, Ihe laying hold of D’.^-vimonis Left-hand, on which the Ring was,
with
The A K v b z.
with her Right, Ihe tells her Husband it was
fo fweird, flie could not get it off, and begging his afliftance, gives him the Chevalier's Finger to pull it off, (at the fame time covering with her Hand his.) The Ring yielding immediately to ViUagnes Force, Ihe gave it him to keep, till Ihe could wear it : and hill continuing to complain how very ill Ihe was, in treats her Husband he would fee himfeif fome of the Servants haften'd to fetch a Phyli-cian. The doating Husband dreading the Effedls of her dilfembled SickneSs, needed no further Sollicitations to go, and hurry his People. He left her as foon as Ihe had delir’d it; and, you may believe the Chevalier did not ftay long after, who heard him chide Morenia for letting her Women lie at fuch a diftance from her I at the fame time promiling to return in a few Moments. And fo fenlible was Ihe that he would not be long away, that Ihe made DAvimont fly down Stairs, vvhillt Ihe flung Mm" his Clothes out of Window; and then having nothing to do but to dilTemble Illnefs enough not to be fufpedled, Ihe thought her-felf vieforious over her Lover, for daring to
Tho' it is certain the Che--fo ill, that it coft be reconciled to him.
difpute with her: valier took this Trick her fome Trouble to
Unhappy Lady, purfued Stanorius, had you then ceafed, and broke oft* your criminal Cor-refpondence, you might have Hill been the Countefs of Villagne^ Hill belov'd by your fond Husband, and none then would have dared to have tax'd your Fame, who after infulted you as the molt loft, the moft abandon'd of Women,
Part III.
But, continued he^ when
C	one©
i
N
l
’ ‘f .
i /
V

J
i
s
r.
X <• V *•
.
'*%
.%

10 ‘The P R u D Ei
Once begun, when once enter’d, how feldom do the Guilty retire from Vice, and return to Vertue, till Ruin and endlefs Miferies too late make them fenfible of what then is not to be retrieved ! This was Morenid.s unhappy Cafe, who purfued this criminal Intrigue with D*Avimont, till the whole Country was fenfible of her Infamy, her Husband only excepted. But at length, fome Friends of Madam A^imont, having rous’d him to a Sufpicion, a Plan was laid to catch them; and watchful Spies being fet round the Houfe, without any Friend to warn her of the Danger, they did not wait many Nights, before they faw DAvimont entring after the accuftom’d manner to her Chamber. He had not long been there, before the Comt, accompanied by his Friends, alfo enter’d the fame Way; and drawing the Curtains, found the guilty Pair a-bejd together— from which Sight turning his Eyes, he went to a Table, where two of DAvimonh Piftols lay, and taking one of them up, Morenia immediately throwing herfelf out of the Bedjtt.,, his Feet, begg’d him tofpare and not kill her, in the fulnefs of Crimes unrepented of: whi|h caus’d him, a ^ffew.Moments, to look on her without fpe>king; and at laft giving the Pif-tols to his Friends^ (who perhaps were touch’d with a little Pity for what before they.had en-de%our’d to expofe, and ruin to all Eternity) with Shame, and with a deep Groan, as if his Heart was broke, he bid her put on her Clothes, and that Inftant depart his Houfe, which never more Ihould let her in. At the fame time turning to D^Avimont, he told him he was fafe, and might, if he pleas’d, take his
Mif-
TTje Prude. i r
Miftrefs with him. But the Chevalier^ hurrying on his Clothes, returned home, without a Thought of what would become of her ; and in lefs than three Hours receiving a Challenge from the Count, to meet him the nejct Day, he accordingly went to anfwer it: But whatever ASGfurances (our Anceftors had, of righting injur’d Ladies Honours, Perjuries, and all forts of concealed Wrongs, by Juftice ftill fiding with the Vigor’s Sword, here Vil-lagne was worfted, and ow’d his Life to D^Avimont, who did not want Senfe to behave himfelf handfbmely on that Occafion.
In the mean while, the wretched, undone Countefs, obeying her Husband’s ftern Command, was obliged to depart, tho’ Ihe knew not whither to go, or what compaflionate Houfe would receive fuch a Load of Infamy : No Servant of the Count follow’d to affift, or comfort her in this Diftrefs which was the more extreme by the Seafon, a hoary Froft covering the Ground, the cold bleak Winds pierced her to the Heart. Thus benumb’d with Cold, and ftunn’d with her Misfortune, fhe wander’d the tedious Night, till Day appear’d ; and then the Dread of being feen, made her rally up Courage enough to Seek for Shelter in fome wretched Hut. All her Husband’s meaneft Tenants were forbid to receive, or take the leaft Notice of this miserable Lady; and fo great was the general Deteftation of all the Country againft Morenia, for injuring fo good a Husband, that not one of any Rank or Diftindfion, vouchfafed to take any Notice, or give her the common
Relief| which Gompaffion demands from us
C
2
for
. A
IZ TkePRVDB.
■	/ s	.	.
for the meiineft, the vileft of Criminals, whofe Sufferings were equal to hers. But now, alas! Ihe whofe Frown was dreaded, and whofe Pity was fought in the mcft fuppliant manner, is reviled and ridicul’d by the loweft, the moft abjedf People of the Country.
The firft News Ihe heard after her depar-ture from the Counts, was of the Duel between him and Tf Anjimom, to whom fhe fent to delire to fee him j but inifead of complying with her Requeft, he told the Bearer, that he began to be fenfible of his Folly, and intended to give over all future Thoughts of it; deii-ring he would tell Morenia.^ that he intended not to be prefs’d any more on that fcore.
Tho’, continued St2it\onus., I will not pretend to defcribe her Grief, or Refentment, to find herfeif ruin’d by fatally loving one fo little worthy of it; yet a few days after, fully to be convinc’d of her Mifery, fhe again fent to defire he would only fupply her witii as much Money, as would carry her to fds : But all the Anfwer fhe got, was, that he did not quellion but a Lady of her good Senfe had taken care to provide againft fucli a Misfortune as had happen’d, which, ac cording to the manner of her Condudf, fie muft needs expeft. This Reproach, at another time, would have made Morenia done fome defperate thing to him; but now flie was in a condition to have her Anger as much fcorn’d, as her AfRidfions were unpitied. Her Husband was fo obdurate, that he woud not be prevail’d on to give her the leaf: Relief ; and fuing out a Divorce againft
her, defir’d all her Friends, that hp might
not
more
P R U D fi.

not hear her mentionM any more than if fhe never had a Being : Which Morema being Soon made fenfible of, refolved by fome means to get to Brujfels^ having a Relation there, whofe Fortune She had railed. But, good God! how furpriz’d was Ihe, when endeavouring to fell the Ring LIAitimont had pre-fented her with, which flie carried from the Count's on her Finger, to find it was indeed like himfelf, a falfe glittering Pebble, on which fhe could not raife two Piftoles 1
However, Ihe at length got to BruffeU, whei*e the Malice of her Stars treating her with the fame Severity they had begun to do in her native Country, that Friend, that Relation from whom fhe expected fome Aflift-ance, and who to her Generofity ow’d his Rife, and all that he had, inftead of aflfording her that friendly Relief fhe expected, Shut his Door againft her, proclaiming her Infamy through the City \ fo that fhe was gaz’d on by all as a Mark of Contempt and Scorn ; being reduced to fuch Extremities, that at laft, to fupport Life, (in the deftitute Habit of a Beggar) fhe haunted about an Hofpital for the mufty Victuals that were left by the Sick.
Ah! fd.d Emelia, here interrupting Stano-rius, how has this Lady’s deep and bitter Affliction, in a moment, turn’d my Indignation into Pity 1 And fure, purfued Jhe, the moft fevere Virtue could not help affordin her fome Relief, — tho’ her Ingratitude to ^ tender a Husband, extremely heightens her Offences.— Not but, methinks, he is now too inexorable : It would have been a fmall
matter to have allow’d her fome little Pen-
\
fion.
Id
Prod e.
(ion, to have faved her from ftarving, and prevented her from 'having an Excufe to continue the fame guilty Courfe. Your Opinion, anfiver*d Stanorius, is not only merciful, but juft ; and I donot queftion, added he^ but if Mevenia had fallen within the View of your Companion, Ihe would have been prefervM from returning back to that unhappy State which then her Diftrelfes forc’d her to.
For a Gentleman belonging to the Mar-quifs de MontroviUe^ happening to go to fee a wounded Friend in the Infirmary, faw and knew Moreniay waiting for Food in that ab-je6t State I have reprefented; and being touch’d with Compaflion for fo uncommon an Objedf of Diftrefs, the next Morning, in his Attendance on the Marquifs, took care to acquaint him with it, Marcander and my-felf being prefent. De MontroviUe confulted with us how to relieve this Lady, without letting her know her Benefadlor j he juftly imagining her haughty Soul mpft feel a thoufand unealy Pangs, to be forc’d to receive a Favour from him of that kind. On which Mar~ cander, who was of the fame Country, and had heard fuch lavilh Praifes of her Beauty, undertook to carry her de Montrovilld.s Prefent, and conceal from her the generous Donor.
But neither her Wants, nor Grief, being able to deftroy all that vaft Stock of Beauty, her patient Sorrow, and her flowing Tears, adding a diftrefsful Softnefs to her Eyes, fo greatly pleaded her AftliDions to Marcander^ that from feeling all the Power of Pity, he foon became acquainted with Love’s Force,
in
The Prude.
15
in fo violent a manner, that even in the Grave ihe ftill keeps the fame tender Impreflions her Beauty and Mifery firft made on his Soul, Morenia, on beholding the Hundred Pieces he brought, (a mighty Sum to her penurious Diftreflfes!) tho’ not long before fhe had often thrown away as much on a Trifle, or idle Humour, faid. Is it poflible, that any one has fo much Companion for the loft, the defpifed Morenta!— I cannot believe it, purfued /be, it;’s but a deluding, pleafing Dream— and I, alas! fhall too foon be waked again to Want, and all' the Terrors with which (he haunts me.— And then more fully viewing the Money, and returning Marcander Thanks for his generous Condefcenfion (as (he ftiled it) in vi-fiting one fo wretched, (he faid, continuing her Difcourfe, Who is it that has been fo
» '*V. .	^
to beftov/ a pitying Thought on the miferable Morenta ? Oh, added /he, I know it can be no other but the too much wronged ViUagne, that would do a Deed fo merciful as this ; he was deftind to load me with Bleflings, whilft my accurs’d Folly has repaid his wond’rous Goodnefs, with nought but the blackeft Ingratitude. But when Marcander had alfur’d her it was not from the Count, her difappointed Hope of his Pity filfd her with fo violent a Grief, that turning her Eyes to Heaven, (he faid. Oh let me die, before I again endure the tormenting Pains of Hunger, that now prey on my vital Spirits ! This Money will foon be wafted, and the generous Giver will grow weary of fuch repeated Favours, and I muft again feel all thofe exquiflte Miferies, that now
have
greatly good
i6
f
*Hoe Prude.
have almoft deftroy’d ’me—quite, I hope. In pronouncing the laft Word, fhe fwoon’d a-way, and with much difficulty Marcander got her recover’d ; who immediately had her removed, and provided with Servants, and all other things fuiting her QuaUty. Her Beauty being reftored by Plenty, and a more contented State of Mind, fhe became the Admiration of the Place where fhe had lately been treated with fuch Contempt ^ and after Mar-canders Friendfhip-to her, was vifited by Per-fons of diftinDion.
It was then, purfued Stanorius, that I had the honour to be acquainted with her, and learnt from herfelf feveral Particulars I have related j who always, by accufing herfelf, vindicated the Count her Husband’s ufage of her.
But foon a deep Confumption feiz’d her, thought to be occafion’d by her paft fevere Hardfhips; with, perhaps, a fecret fear that if Marcander fhould defert her, fhe might a-gain fall into the fame unfufSerable Misfortunes, the very Thought of which was fo terrible to her, that often on the mention of them, fhe has been ready to fwoon. And indeed, fo extremely had her Affiidfions ruffled and bow’d her Spirit, from the gay, the extravagant Pleafures fhe once purfued, that fhe receiv’d her approaching Death with a calm Sedatenefs ; employing the fhort Time, to obtain a more effedfual Mercy, than that which the barbarous World refufed to her Oftences and Sufferings ; intreating Marcander that he would let her Husband know, her laft Breath was employ’d in defiring his and Hea-ven’5 Forgivenefs.	But
*lTj e Prude.
17
But had you feen, faid Stanorius, the afEi-<5led Marcander^ in the latter part of her III-nefs, all your Concern for her would have been loft, in endeavouring to con Sole him, whole Grief and Care was fo extreme, that he daily importuned the Phyficians to exert their Skill in ftriving to fave her ; and hardly could he be drawn from her, to preferve himfelf by Sleep, or Food; and fo inSupportable was his Sorrow for her Death, that he faw not the Sun for above a Month. But Time, and his Friends Care, at length prevail’d on him ; he fuffer’d himfelf to be led into Company ; tho* ftill fo deep a Melancholy is fix’d in his Soul, that all his Joys and Happinefs feem buried in her Grave. He did not fail -to have M?-remd.s laft Requeft carry’d to Villagne; but that incenfed Husband, now hating with a Violence as extreme as his former Love, flow’d no other Concern for her Death, or Repentance, than being i married in a few days to an agreeable Lady, whole Vertues made him as happy, as he had been the contrary with Morenia,
Stanorius having finifli’d the Hiftory of Aii?-Yenia^ the Ladies made Remarks on the fe-veral Pafiages, according to their different Tempers. Elijtnda approved ViUagnes 1 _ Condudf on the difcovery of her Crime j Erne-lia blamed DAvimont^s unworthy PalTion, and Ufage ,* and Bellamira pitied the difconfolate Grief of Manander : In which Difcourfe, moft of the Time was wafted, till they arriv’d at Emelid.*s : Where Stanorius and Mar-bander were furprized at the Neatnefs of the
Part III.	D	Build-
i8
Fhe P R u D E.

Building, with the well-chofen Profpeft, which being feated on the Side of 1 Hill, the Front (only intercepted by a few pleafant Paftures) over-look’d a River, the breadth of which, was not fo great, as to prevent the diftant Shore from yielding a delightful Landskip to the Eye. The riling Hills, fhiriing with golden Corn, caus’d the verdant Vales, and fcatteSd Trees, by aconfufed Variety, at once to entertain them with Nature’s chiefeft Works.
But if they were charm’d with this delightful View, which feem’d rather owing to Chance, than a nice Judgment, how infinitely more were they, when entring the Hoiife, they found in Miniature, moft of the many difterent Arts and Ways of Building, Statuary, and Painting, that not only Europe^ but the World affords. They were from a large Hall led into feveral Apartments, the Adornment of which were fo different from each other, that whilft they were diverted with the exqiiifite Painting, the majeftick Order, and noble Grandeur of a Kornan Model, they were infenfibly led to the ruftick Simplicity of a Got hick one, where Fancy appear’d agreeably confus’d with lefsfeemmg Art. Nor was Emelia fo little pleas’d with her Indian Voyage, as not to have in her Houfe a pattern of their ingenious contriv’d Baths, w'-hich, after their manner, were adorn’d with high-priz’d Cabinets, beauteous China Jars, and their gay Pidlures.
The Gentlemen took but a flight View of the Houfe, before they underflood Dinner was ready, where they found all things order’d, with a decent Elegance, fuitable to whatever Emelia made her Care.	Dinner
The P
10
Dinner being ended, fhe brought them into an Apartment, where, amongft other cu*' rious Pidlures, was one that reprefeaited a beauteous Lady, juft yielded up a Prey to all-devouring Death, furrounded by the weeping Graces, and every female Vertue expref-fing inconfolable Grief for her lofs, whofe Life had been ftridUy guided by their Rules ; and the God of Love appearing nigher the Front, in deep Defpair, had broken his Bow, thrown away his Arrows, whilft with folded Arms, and heaving Breafts, his fwol’n Eyes were fixM on a Tablet, on which was writ, Paftora is no more.
Marcander^ who was pleas’d with every thing that Sooth’d his Melancholy for the lofs of the lovely Morenia^ being wonderfully ftruck with this Piece, prais’d the juft Propriety, with the Painter’s excellent Skill and Fancy. BeUgrand faid, the laft indeed was incomparable, tho’ he could not bear to Ipok on it, it being but a ftilF Copy of a very valuable Original which he had. And yet, fwerd Emelia, when 1 borrow’d it to have this Copy drawn, and they both had lain fome time, you could not difcover the difference, till you examin’d the wrong Side, and found it by the antiquity of your own Canvas. The' Company Smil’d at Bellgrand.s fancied Nicety and Skill, fo juftly exploded by Emelia.
But whilft they were thus amufing them-felves in a general Converfation, there being a Piece which reprefented the Queen of Beauty, holding in her Hand one of her Son’s mifchie-vdus Weapons, where fhe Seem’d to be cpii-
D 2	Sultin


cr
£S
V.S
zo
lihe Prude.
Now,
Suiting whth him, in order to have him ftrike the God of IVar with the keeneft, (who tho' he lay fleeping, was clofely armM, as readily prepar’d for an expedled ASfanit) Stamms perceiving BeUamira to fix her Eyes on it, (ad-drefling his Difcourfe to her) faid. Madam, you fee, tho’ that dreadful God can alarm the whole World, with his tremendous Power, with how feciire, how triumphant a Smile, the Goddefs and her Son exult over a Hero too fecure of her more vidtorious Charms.
I rather think, reply^d Bellamira, that pleafed, that fatisfied Air, which appears in both their Looks, is owing to the finding him afleep, whofe fternnefs would certainly fright them away, were he awake. Were he, as fenSible of your Beauty's Power, refurnd Sta-moriiis, as that fam'd Deity is, you would know, that tho' he with outrageous Deftru-dlion made whole Nations groan, yet to your inchanting Form, and celeftial Perfedtions, he would bow with pleafed Submiffion, and no more employ his Arms, but to guard and protedf you. Methinks, dnfwedd Bellamira, I would willingly owe my Security to fome^ thing lefs, who, perhaps, in his Anger, might without diftindfion deftroy me too.— I perceive, faid Stanorius, with a difeontented Look, the Soldier, the efteemed Favourite of the Fair, has Something in him too terrible to pleafe the delicacy of yourDifpofition. You mi-ftake, refuTVd foe ;for 1 both efteem and admire them, when they turn their Force, and undaunted Valour, only againft their Country’s Foes } tho' even then, methinks, I would have
them, when the remorfelefs Fury of the Fight
is
The Prude.
Mercy
11
only to fpare the Captive, but endeavour to lighten their Afflictions, by Offi ces of Huma-
nity
Madam, anfi
Gallantrythat Mercy you prefcribe to the Conquerors in War, you’ll exercife to the wretched Slaves your victorious Beauty has bound in the never-to-be-broken Chains of Love. Ntere I miftrefs, replied foe, of thofe Perfections your Flattery would inlinuate, you have juftly obferv’d I am too ignorant of its Power, to be able to judge what to do with my imaginary Slaves.— Do not believe, faid Stanorius, zvith a moreferious Look, but your numbeiiefs unequal’d Charms, too much excel all Defcription to admit of Flattery; they dart fo dangeroufly bright, that the Senfes grow wild with Pleafure, and the o’erwhelm’d Soul is loft amidft their attracting Luftre; This Difcourfe is beyond my Comprehenlion, faid Bellamira; at the fame time riling from her Seat, and j'oining with the Company, whilft an angry Blufh, that oerfpread her Face, mado Stanorius fenfible her Heart was not like to prove an eafy Prey.
Elijinda, all the time of their Difcourfe, obferving them, and too plainly perceiving each Look and Action of his confeSs the Lover ; Jealoufy, with all her Train of reftlefs Torments, in a moment feiz’d her : her haughty Soul could not bear to find herfelf neglected, and a prefent Beauty triumphing o’er her no'w defpifed Charms. Pride, Envy, and the Defire to be reveng’d, in an inftant, railed fuch an Uproar in her Soul, that unable tp contain, or command the ftruggling Paf-
fions.
Z1 The P R u D E.
fions, |he immediately withdrew, to give them vent, and with her Confidant meditate Revenge.
When it was told Emelia, that Lugmta paf-fing by her Houfe, and hearing She was return’d, came to pay her a Vifitf the Friend-fhip She had for that Lady, caus’d Emelia to receive her with open Arms : But how fur-priz’d wasihe, to fee Lugenia habited in the forlorn Weeds of Widowhood ! who, when She left the Country, had fcarce loft the Name of Bride: Which Emelia expreffing by an amazing Concern, the other, from the full An? guilh of Soul, anfwer’d her in Tears; and her Grief being too violent to be ftifled, fhe ut? ter’d her Sorrows in difconfolate Complaints, contrary to the well-bred Silence obferved on fuch Occafions. But Marcander, touch’d with her fad Plaints, and pitying ABlidfions, that had fo nighly refembled his own, feconded her Sadnefs, by ikying. No Misfortune could equal the Lofs of a dearly-lov’d Friend by Death ; for if they w'ere inconfbant or falfe, a refenting Anger generally prov’d a Corro-five to cure the Difappointment ; but from Death there was no Retrieve, no friendly Hope, nothing but Defpair, and heart-wounding An-guilh.—■ To which the fair Widow joining in Expreffions full of Grief, began to tell how happy Ihe had been, how very much belov’d, and now how more than miferable his Lofs had made her : Aiid this melancholy Talk now Suiting better with Marcander^ than the gayer Converfation of thofe who were not touch’d with Sorrows like w'hat he and the
difconfolate IJ^g^M^ fuftain’d ; they foon from
the
‘The P R u D Ei
13
the affinity of their Woes, began to cultivate a great Efteem for each other.
The Weather being extremely hot, Emelia led the Company into an open Summer-houfe, which being built on the higheft Eminence of the Garden, at once difcover’d to their View, the Country River, and a Park, that joined to the Garden, where they could behold the neat-limbM Deer, fporting in carelefs Delight, now fearlefs of the Hunter, and his voracious Train. Marcander'wiiS IVLVpx’ixtd and charm’d at the beauteous Prolpedf, with the Order, and Variety that appear’d thro’ all the Garden : And tho* Stanorius was better acquainted with it, and faw, and knew the once delightful Window, through which, by the help of a corded Ladder, he pafs’d to the fair EUfinda; yet, on thofe Occalions, he had taken fuch flight Views, that his Wonder was little lefs than Marcander s.
This well-chofen fpot of Ground had formerly been a Wood, on the fide of a moderately rifing Hill, thro’ which ran a Brook, which now helped by Art, in feveral Turnings winding about the whole Garden, towards the Bottom united its feparated Streams into one great one, which in a delightful Caf-cade defcended into a Canal where Statues of Nereids and Sea-Nymphs were placed ; others bathing or fporting on the Banks, combing
; around which grew ail forts of choice Flowers, as confufedly fcat-ter’d, as if it had only been done by the wild Hand of Nature.— Green Walks afcending on each fide of the Cafcade, were lined with the climbing Jelfamine, and the well-known
Rofe,
their green Locks
Z4
P
J
]R.ore, that every where diffus’d its Sweets; which at length fell into others, ftiaded over head by feveral Ways, and meeting here and there, at once entertain’d the Eye with beauteous Parterres, Flowers, Fountains, and green Arbours; whilft the Ears were charm’d with a Chorus of almoft all the winged Songfters. But that Wonder ceas’d, when advancing farther into the woodieft part of the Garden, an Aviary was difcover’d, which Erne'-Ua had fo artfully contriv’d, to preferve her imprison’d Mulicianers, that by removing the Covers, they had all the Advantage of the Sun, and Air, without fuft’ering any thing from Storms, and the moft inclement Seafons.
But tho’ the general Converfation was on the delightful Beauties of the Garden, yet Marcander, and the lovely Widow, (whom Emelia prevail’d on to ftay a few days at her Houfe) by their mournful Talk, So Sooth’d their Grief, that at length, amidft their Dif-courfe on the Perfedfions of the Dead, they began to be Senfibly touch’d with each other’s, especially Marcander,
But Night, and the time of Repofe advancing, Elijinday (who in Spite of Stanijfds Per-fuafion, that Ihe might be miftaken) endured all the inSufterable Torments of JeaiouSy ; her too skilful Discernment eafily perceiving the cold Negledl of one Day’s changed Love; and the innocent ObjeD: being So nigh, added a treble Vexation, by Seeing the ComplaiSance, the indearing Civilities, and Adorations paid to another, which once were hers. Stantjfds Observation, how unSucceSsful his Addreffes would prove, had no effedl to affiiage her
Re-
The P
2-5
Refentment: It was enough flie had Charms, and he a Heart fufceptible of them, for her to refolve to pirrfue them both, with the dead-lieft Revenge, tho* her experienc’d Confidant did not fail to inforce, that Stanorius was of a Spirit too haughty to bear it, without fe-verely retorting it, by blafting her Fame, with all the fatal Confequences that naturally muft enfue ; telling her, Ihe was too fenfible it was eafier to gain a hundred new, than to recall back one deferted Heart. Which wrought at laft fo far on her, as to fuller Stanijfa to go and expoftulate with him, and by that means either to be freed from the torment of fufpcct-ing, or certainly to be convinc’d.
Staniffa obeying her Order, (as foon as Sta^ norius was retired to his Chamber) vifited him 'i who at firft but faintly denying the Charge, quickly owned the Revolt of his Heart: And fo great was the Power of his Eloquence, and Gold, that Stanijfa too revolts, is falfe to Friendfliip,and unmindful of her extreme Obligations to Elifinda I now aflifting his new Paflion, acquainting him with all the Foibles, and Secrets of that Family, with Inftru6lions how moft artfully to wind himfelf into their Tempers : Nor does fhe omit to inform him, that Ihe fears the agreeable Lyfander had touch’d Bellamird.s}Iit2iXt, vtit\\Emeli a^ s Friend-Ihip for him ^ and how Elijinda^ and Ihe, got the Letter heretofore mention’d j adding, Ihe fufpe(5fed Emelia fecretly favour’d him, tho’ Ihe was certain her nice Honour would not fuffer her to prefs in his behalf, unlefs Fortune Ihould advance him to a higher Rank than there was yet any probability of: That
Part III.	E
J
l6
‘The Prude.
Ihe indeed had the moft Power over rd.s Inclinations, but that her Fortune was So entirely in her Brothers’s power, that uniefs Ihe married with his Confent, Ihe had no Pretences to any j and tho’ he was very much mi-Bnenced by. EJiJinda, yet Ihe was pertain the Knowledge he had of Stanvrittd.s great Into-reft at Court, with the Hopes that fo near an Alliance might introduce him into the Mini-
w':ould over-balance all Perfuafions a-i it. ■ Stanijfa alfo alTur’d Stamrius, Hie was confident Bellgrand had fo paflionate a Helire to be a Statefman, as to be certain that one Foible in Courage, would make him invulnerable to EUJindd.s Refentment, or Perfuafions ; from whom Ihe advifed him to conceal his Love, till he had firft wrought on the
Brother to confent. Nor did Ihe omit to in-
%
timate, that if Emelia was to be drawn to his Intereft, it muft be by nicely infinuating an Admiration of her Condudh, and CompaSion,
with what an agreeable eafinefs Ihe trod the rugged Paths of Vertue. Nor did Stanijfa fail to promife Stamrius^ that Ihe would amufe Elifindd.s Sufpicions with all her Skill.
Stanorius having thus got the Clue to wind himfelf into all their Tempers, and BeJigrand.s Aft'edtions, did not fail as artfully to put it into pradhice. It was pleafant to lee with wdiat Addrefs he perfuaded Bellgrand a pecu-^ liar Gravity in his Air would become the Statefman; that he was certain his Notions w'-ere fo fitly adapted to the Spirit of the French, that once enter’d into Buftnefs, he did not queftion but he would equal Maz^rndnes Solidity of Judgment, quick Penetration, and
liibtle
r R U D
17
s
Subtle Schemes : Which fo exa(5Hy anfwer’d Stanijjd.s Advice, that he immediately grows gi'ave, fententious, and myfterious; all his Thoughts being now employ’d how to become a compleat Politician. And fo tranfported is he with Stanorius^ that without giving him the trouble to ask, he tells him he wifties aa could be prevail’d on to marry, whofe Fortune was conliderable j but if he would accept of BeJJamtra^ to have the Happiiiefs of hi 'Alliance, he would double the Portion her Father had left her. To which the pleafed Sta--norius anfwer’d, by telling him, his obliging Propofal had only prevented his requeuing it: and for fear of Elijinda^ he did not leave Bellgrand till he had gain’d from him a folemn Promife, that no Sollicitations Should make
him revoke it.
But, alas! how differently was this intended Marriage received by the Ladies ! Ernelia is- troubled and concern’d j Ihe pities Lyfan-> dor, and tho’ Ihe owns Stanoriut the fine Gentleman, and of unqueftionable Birth and Fortune, yet Ihe thinks his Morals too loofe to make BeUamira a good Husband, any longer than his Paflion lafts, which Ihe is not infen-fible may too foon be worn out; Whilft Bella--^ piiray by declaring her Hatred to Stanorius^ and this Match, avows her Tendernefs for Iyfander* She weeps, Ihe begs Ernelia to intercede with her Brother, owning Ihe had rather with an humble Fortune be happy with Lyfander^ than amidft the dazzling Gran4eur^ of a Court, wretched with Stanorim,
When Elifinda firfl: from her Brother Iearn’4 this diftradting News, Ihe flew into fuch an
OUt€
E a
IZiO
Lhe P R u D i.
\
r
outrageous Paffion, that he imaging file was belide her Wits; who making Stanmuh Lewdnefs her Excufc, in bitter Terms exclaims againft him, and repeats all his Intrigues and Faults ; adding, Was fuch a one fit for her innocent Sifter ? But BeUgrand, who by this time was grown too great a Politician, to mind a Woman s Railings, only laughs at all fhe could inforce, againft Stanorius j telling her, he had Reafons above her weak Difcern-ment, and that trifling Women were not to be confulted in Affairs of Confequence j defiring her to mind her Devotions, and leave him toadl as he fiiould judge proper. This prove-/ king her beyond all Patience, flie did not omit in her fatyrical Anger to let him know fhe could not think it was the Excels of his Wif-dom that had caufed him to make this Match. And finding him in a Humour fo little inclined to hearken to Reafon, fhe at laft left him; when paflingthro^a Gallery to her own Apartment, flie met Stanorius, w'ho, before fhe fpolte, perceiv’d by the Anger that flafh’d in her Eyes, fhe was acquainted with the deligned Marriage : whilft fhe advancing haftily to him, faid, Do not imagine, tho’ you have obtain’d my Brother’s Confent, that I will ever fufler thij criminal Marriage j bafe Man, cry*dIhe, is it not enough, that you have wrought upon my eafy Nature, but you muft affront me in fo near a Relation ? A Sifter 1 —> Good God,
faid fhe, continuing her Difcourfe, can it be pof-fible that‘ fuch Wickednefs fhould enter the Heart of Man ? What, can your black Soul • be fatisfied with nothing lefs than the horrid, the abominable Crime of Inceft ? — Are you
not

'The P R u D Ei
^9
not afraid the Fiends and Furies will haunt your guilty Soul, and drag you quick to internal perdition, for even the very Delire of it ? On which Stanorms looking on her with a fcornful Smile, faid, Had not your Ladyfliip talFd in fo pious a Strain, I Ihould have imagin’d your Anger had bedn real; but. Madam, purfued he, you are fenfible you and I are too well acquainted with each other’s Opinion on that Point, for you to imagine I Ihould have any apprehenfion or fe9.rs of Sprites and Goblins : And, added he, I will only prefume to tell you, I can no more now rehft adoring the amiable Bell amir a, than I once could the fair Elijtnda • tho’ with this difference, as my Paffion is infinitely more violent, and, I believe, more lafting, I would not advife you to op-pofe it, left in my difappointed Anger, I Ihould happen to difcover the Reafons that induce you to fo great a Cruelty.
Thefe laft Ihocking Words, fo extremely increas’d her already high-wrought Rage, that Ihe could only exprefs it by broken Speeches, and ftamping; and had certainly done fome extravagant Outrage, had not Stanijfa then enter’d the Gallery, and with a wild Concern in her Looks, defin’d to fpeak with her. At which Stanorius, with a low Bow, withdrew, leaving that Confidant to inform her Lhomafo was return’d from his Voyage, and had had the Affurance to follow her to Emelians, where he had made fo infolent a Noife amongft the Servants to fee her, as to caufe them, faid Staniffa, to call me to him , whom he treated with fuch a furlyJmpudence, that I fear he intends to be very audacious, unlefs you fee him,
and fully fatisfy his Demands.	Floods
J
Fhe P R U D E.
r
Floods of Water thrown on raging Fires, could not more effeDually ftifle the impetuous Flames, than this News in a moment did Elifindd.s Anger : Cold Fear, with a thoufand intangled Thoughts, now diftraD: her, fo that ihe knows not what to do : See him Ihc muft, Stanijfa having convinc’d her, he was come with a defign to affront her, unlefs Ihe com-ly’d with his Requeff. Nor was flie mifta-en, for Lhomafo having fpent the Money £//-* fnda gave him, and boafted of her Favours, was, by his lewd drunken Companions, per-fuaded to return home, and threaten her if Ihe would not fupport his Extravagance: And not finding her in Town, he took the opportunity of following her to Emelid.s, in the fame vile Company, who Were obliged to bring their Sloop into that Part of the Country, to deliver out fome Goods not above two Miles from thence.— Thus 'was Elijinda for^ ced to fee him, and ftrive, by a Soothing Compliance, join’d with her Money, to bribe his Silence : When after fome Difcourfe about his return, and underftanding the VelSel he went in, had brought him fo nigh to Emdlid.s^ Ihe difmifs’d him with an Appointment to meet her that Night at eleven a-clock, under the Garden-wall, where Ihe would come to him.
But tho’ Love and Stamrius perplex’d the beauteous heUamira^ and tormented Elijinda^ he began to exercife his Power in a more plea-fing manner on the Heart of Marcander ; for the' lovely weeping Widow had nigh difpelSd the fad Remembrance of Morenia ,* her pa-thetick Sorrow for the Dead, fo exaftly fyni“
that from compaffio-
natingj
pathiz d with his own
Prude.
3i
hating, he grows tender; his own AfHiDions are forgot in being uneafy at thofe Ihe endures. Her three Days flay with Emelia.^ wrought fo great a Change in him, that at her departure, it feem’d as if his Life and Senfes too were departed ; and often forcing a Difcourfe of her to Emeliay that Lady at length entertain’d him with fome Palfages of Lugenid.^ Life in thefe Words.
^he Hijiory of Lugenia.
y.
TH Oyfaid Emelia, Lugema is now the only
Child of the Chevalier de Blamtille^ who has a very confiderable Eftate, yet not three Years fince, he had two Sons that caufed him and Madam de Blanville to look on gmia as an Incumbrance on their Eftate ; which they refolving not much to lelfen by giving her too large a Fortune, this was, I am confident, Emelia, the real Reafon that they encourag’d the Addreffes of a young Gentleman named Philamonty who was infinitely more obliged to Nature for the Accomplifhments of his Mind, than to the Liberalities of Fortune. However, his Love to Lugenia caufing him not to mind the parfimonious Ofiers of her Parents, the Day of their Marriage was fix’d ; when de BlanviUe received a Letter from the University, whither he had fent his Sons to ftudy, in which was the afRidting News that one of them was already dead of the Smallpox, and the other in fo dangerous a way, asi to caufe them to defpair of his Recovery.
This
3^
Fhe Prude
This being a juft Excufe to delay the Marriage for lome time, Philamont foon perceiv’d by the change of de BlamiUe^s and his Lady’s Behaviour, that all his Hopes of having that young Lady, depended on the Life of her Brother i which filling him with a grief equal to his Love, he complain’d of it to Lu-^nia\ who, ignorant of her Parents Sentiments, perfuaded him his Fears were vain; and that their Coldnefs proceeded only from the extremity of their Grief, which had too much ftunn’d them, to be capable of that Com-plaifance they ufually paid their Friends: Tho’, to calm his uneafy Doubts, Ihe alfur d him (if her Parents fliould prove fo cruel) neither their Perfuafion, nor Force, Ihould have any Efte£f on her Heart, which Ihe vow’d to preferve inviolably his.
But tho’ the amorous Philamont was for the prefent pacified to find Lugenids Faith and Love unalterable, the News of their fecond Son’s Death caufed de Blanville and his Lady, after they had firft acquainted Lugenia with their Mind, publickly to declare to PU^ lamont, they thought him not now a fit Match for their Daughter j and at the fame time making him fenfible his Departure was defired, they would not fuffer him to take Leave of that Lady, whom they had confined to her Chamber.
The abrupt and difobliging Manner in W’^hich they exprefs’d their Mind to him, caufed Philamont to quit their Houfe with a Refentment great as his Grief; who immediately coming to me, exprefs’d his Concern for that amiable Lady’s Lofs in fuch moving
Terms,
\
Tk P
3}
Terms, that I thought him truly worthy of Pity. But tho^ he painted their USage in a manner that fhowM his Refentment was deep, yet Love being predominant, he foon began to beg my Friendihip, (knowing there was a great familiarity between that Family and me) to try what my Perfualion could do in his behalf. I promis a him to employ all my Intereft, tho* I defpair’d of fucceeding; when ifithemidft of our Difcourfe, his Man, who ftaid behind to pack up his Linnen, brought him a Letter, which he faid Lugenia had thrown him out of a Window : Philamo?it opening it, found in it thefe Words.
The Unhappy Lugenia to Philamont.
T Know not how my Father has dealt with you^ but fearby his late Converfation with me^ he has not fcrupled to acquaint you with the inhuman Refolution he has taken^ to part us for ever. — Fhe very Fhought is more bitter to me than Death would be; nor do I believe Phila— mont can bear it with much more Fortitude, How cruel a Monfier is Ambition ! and how does it break all Bands of Friendfoip^ Love^ and even paternal Pity ! For^ ips not a Month fence he cbmmanded me to receive^ to regard, and love you as a Husband', and how readily did I obey that delightftd Command ! and how did it caufe me to indulge a Paffion I before would not permit my felf to think on ! I told my Father this, when he forbid me ever to fee you again, and charVd me to forget you ; but that, alas ! I neither can nor wiU do, fo long as Philamont has any Regard for the wretched Lugenia. Ids
Part III.	F
/
truej / owe
my Parents
s.
?4
The Prude*
Parents fuch RefpeB and Duty^ as not to marry till their Confent is again ohtam d • which if they continue to deny, helieite me^ no ill ufage IhaU force me to be another*s^ if I cannot be yours^ who firft lov d me without any View of Interefl—- rurr fhall Fortune*s fickle changings ever alter me^ fo
long as I find you faithful to youx
LUGENIA.
If you can connive to write to the whilB I am confind^ I will look every Night out of the Window^ and find means to draw up whatever Phi-lamont fends.
The Lover, a little confblated with this Letter, refolv’d to wait till their Grief was abated, and then tty What the Interceflion of Friends could do 5 relying on Lugenia*s Con-Hancy, with whom he took care to keep a Correspondence by Letters, as Ihe had directed.
The Parents continuing obftinate againft him, efpecially Madam de Elanville, who never had a Value for her Daughter equal to that fhe had for her decealed Sons, they Suddenly remov'd with Lugenia to Town , and carrying that young Lady to Court, her Beauty, fuch as you See (not but her Grief has made fome disadvantageous Changes in her Perfon) join'd to her other Perfeftions, and great Fortune, gained a Crowd of Adorers; among which, her Father declar'd in favour of a Nobleman fomewhat advanc'd in Years. And Lugenia finding neither her Tears, norliitrea-ties could prevail ori htr Parents, Ihe at laft refolv'd, to acquaint her defigned Husband,
that
The P
?5
that her Heart and Vows were another’s, and that unfefs Heaven and her Parents permitted her to be Philamont\ Ihe fhould efteem herfelf the miferableft of Women. Her Intreaties and Reafons prevail’d on this Lover to delift from his Pretenlions: which when her father difcover’d her to have been the Caufe of, irritated by his Lady, he rafhly commanded her to leave his Houfe, and never to appear ^ain in his 1:
flatter’d herfelf, that her being an only Child fhouH caufe them to indulge her in fo ridiculous aFolly. Poor Lugenia is forced to obey them; but tho’, /aid Emelia, flie ftill held a Correfpondence with Philamont^ yet Ihe had the difcretion, inftead of going to him, to come direDly into the Country tb me, and defire my Protedfion, till her Patents were appeasM. I very much approving her Condudl, alfur’d her ftie was welcome ^ and being fenfible of her Afllidfions, did all I could to divert her. iBiit tho’ I was not without Sufpicions, that Philamont an4 Ihe often wrote to each other, yet Ihe never defir’d to fee him at my Houfe, knowing it did not agree with my Sentiments, to encourage Lovers againft their Parents Approbation ; not that I did not vgry much blame hers, for their ungenerous Behaviour to Philamont., joined with their Cruelty to fo va
luable a Child.
• * . * ____
But whatever my Sentiments were, faid Emelia, Madam de Blanvilles Vanity being extremely mortified to find her Daughter fo obftinately refufe’ to become a Peerefs, together with her Grief for the death of her Sons^ the youngeft of which xvas her Favourite^
L 2.	that
Prude,
that te lefs than fix Months fhe died, without ever defiring to be reconciled to Lugenia. And de BlanviUe^ exafperated, by the lofs of his Lady, againft Lugenia, complaint fhe had broke her Mother’s Heart; adding, that rather than he would fuffer Philamom to inherit his Eftate, he would marry, and beget a new Race. That Gentleman being told of this, it occafion’d his writing a Letter to Luge-^ nia on thatSubje£f j when the Servant that was ufualiy entrufted to carry his Letters to her, by fome means being intoxicated with Liquor, and Haying in Company that pleas’d him, defined a Neighbour to deliver it, who by Mif-take, or Defign, went with it to de BlanvillH Houfe j and he knowing it to be Philamomh
Hand, open’d it, and read the following Lines.
*
Philamom to Lugenia.
O’ your Complaints are only againfi Portunis ^ Cruelty, yet Eonune and Lugenia roo confpire to make me miferahle ; and how little Jhould I nta--lue that blind Deity^s Favours, could I perfuade you from your toofieady Obedience to the cruellefl of
Fathers ? — Alas ! he has abandoned that litle.
1
and his Cruelty has freed you from all filial Duty, or Regard to h 'rm, who is fo very infenfible of what belongs to a Parent, as to ufe the befl of Children with a Barbarity unparaUeVd: Has he ever dif cover d one Spark of Love, Lendernefs, or even Pity in the midfi of his inhuman treatment • and would not hefufifer you to warn the common Supports of Life, were it not for the admirable Emelia ? And fo great is his Averfion, that tho^ he is fenfible Madam deBlanville never had fuch a Regard for you,
as
The Prude.
37
as to have any Concern for your Happinefs, yet he charges you luith breaking her Heart, vowing in revenge to marry, thoi* one would imagine, his Age and Infirmities would rather make him think on thefe that fhould attend his Qhfequies, than Hy-
Porch.
Dear Lugenia, do not chide, but think on the ReafonabKnys of thefe fevere Pruths: thinks tho* you affure me your Heart is mine, how very wretched I mufi: be, fo long as my Happinefs depends on the inexorable de Blanville, who, I am too certain, will refufe the adored Lugenia with, his lafi Breath, to her paffionate Admirer,
philamont.
%
Pho^ Philamont is thought unworthy ^Luge-nia, I am told your'‘Mothed.s Woman is the happy jPerfon whofe Children are to inherit de Blan-villeV Eflate: but^kow little would that trouble me, could I prevail on your obfiinate Vertue to become mine.
It’s impoffible, fdid Emelia, to reprefent what a Rage the reading of this Letter put de Blanville in ordering his Chariot to be made ready, he came immediately to my Houfe : being ver y much furprized to fee him, I was thinking in what manner I Should receive him, (becauSe, ever fince Lugenia had been with me, tho’ I had wrote both to him and his Lady, yet ndther of them anfwer’d my Letters, or vifited me. He began firft to entertain me with his Anger and Refentment, (occafion’d by PhilamonPs Letter) what I found moft • piqued him, was the fcandalizing him about his Maid,and ridiculing his Intentious to marry
After.
‘The Prude.
After he had Ihown me the Letter, in Words that exprefs d the violence of his Paffion, he appealed to me, whether Lugenia was not very much to be blamed, for continuing to love a Man that had fuch difrefpeftful Notions of her Father : But I was fo far from being of his Opinion, as to tell him mySentiments were, that he had drawn this on himfelf, by the Severity of his Ufage and that I thought from Philamont he ought to take nothing ill, if he would but confider how very unhappy he had made that Lover, by difappointing the Fulnefs of his Hopes; whole firft Pretenfion to his Daughter was on egual Terms, and that their AifeDion for each other, was too folemnly confirm’d by his Confent and Approbation, not to be a Crime to part them now. And finding he was violently offended at Philamont for raifipg that Report about his Maid, I affur’d him‘it was the Talk of the whole Country ,* which, together with my re-prefenting Lugemd.s unalterable Duty and Regard for him, in fpite of her Lover’s continual Sollicitations to the contrary, fo far pacified hirh, that before he parted from me, he faw and was reconciled to his Daughter, and in lefs than a Month, by the continual Sollicitations of Philamont^s Friends, he was brought to give his Confent to their Marriage: And I believe, faid Emelia, they would have been perfedfly happy in each other, had Provhdence thought fit to have preferv’d the lov’d Philamont to his dear Lugenia, who own’d her ftridf Obedience, and fteddy Perfeverance increas’d his Efteem and Admiration, at the fame time that it fill’d him with all the uneafy Pangs of a
defpe”
Ti&c Prude.
39
defperate Defpair ; which,y^/dEmelia, lam of Opinion was lb extreme, as to occafion that ill Difpofition of Health, that fo foon after their Marriage put a period to Lugenid.s Hap-pinefs by his Death.
Scarce had Emelia finifh’d thefeWords, when it was told her the Chevalier de Blanville was come to vifit and congratulate her return into the Country; who happening to find fo much good Company at EmeUd.Sy ftaid the whole Day, inviting the Gentlemen the next morning to a Hunting-match that Was to be in his Park. They all readily accepted the obliging Invitation, efpecially Marcander.^ who, by that means, was in hopes again to fee the amiable Widow: and the Gentlemen being intent on their Morning’s Diverfion, all the Company retired fooner than ufual to their Reft, that they mitrht the earlier rife to their
Sport.
This
gave EUfinda an opportunity With lefs difficulty to meet Phomafo, whom fhe design’d the Engine that fhould execute her horrid Revenge, for Stanorius^s Infults: In vain did her Confidant advife her, by peaceably fubmitting to the Marriage, ftill to keep him her Friend; who, faidjhe, Ido not queftion but thus obliged, will readily affifl: you in getting rid for ever of the impudently trou-blefome Phomafoy by having him prefs a for a Soldier, and fent to the Frontiers. But fo far was fhe from hearkening to her, that fhe raved, ftamp’d, and all her Features were di-ftorted with the violence of her Paffion, vowing either to be reveng’d, or perifh in the Attempt; and to Stanijfa hints her Hell-contrived
AO
The Prude.
ved Defigii; but finding fhe Starts at the horrid Wickednefs of it, fhe remembers her always a Friend to Stamrius^ and pretends to decline it. But when fhe met Lhomafo, full of the infernal Mifchief, fhe having learnt from him in the Morning that he came up the River in a Vefl'el, and enquiring the Strength of it, and w^^hether his Conipanions durfi: be bold, and venture a little Hazard, to make their own, and his FovtuneAhomafo promisM largely for himfelf and them, affuring EUJinda^ by the help of her Ladyfhip^s Gold, he can influence them to do every thing fhe defired j though he tells her, it muft be fpeedily put in execution, becaufe they were obliged to return with the Ve(fel in lefs than two days. Whereupon fhe order’d him to lie at Anchor about a Mile up the River, and conceal himfelf with the reft; only letting two of them appear, as if a fiihing, and fhe would take care to bring them their Prey : adding a Charge to Phomajo to ravifh her, as foon as he had got her a-board, and telling him fhe was certain that by that means loft and ruin’d, fhe would be brought to marry him, and her Fortune was large enough to raife him above any fear of future Wants.
This more than devilifh Contrivance being thus laid,withother particular Inftrudions, too tedious here to be inferted, they parted ; and the pious Elijinda, who had fo nice a care of her Reputation, as not to admit of innocent Pleaiures, for fear of being thought guilty of too much Levity, now, as if bereft of her Sen-fes, is ailing the bafeft of Crimes, with mean Villains, that had neither the Skill to manage,
nor that SenSe of Reputation that could induce
M
The Prude.
5uce them to a Defire of Concealment : So great, fo intolerable a Fiend is Jealoufy, and difappointed Love in a Woman’s Breaft, efpe-cially one fo loft to all Vertue 1 But Night’s humid Shades being difperfed by the Morning’s rofy Beams, the Gentlemen went to their Sport, and Emelia was lefs that day crouded with Vifitors than flie had been fince her return; and after Dinner Ihc received a Packet of Letters, which Ihe opening to read, BeUamira (who only was prefent} perceiving as Ihe perus’d it, her Colour often to change from a glowing Red, to a deadly Pale, concern’d at her Diforder, began to enquire the occafion. On which that Lady an-fwer’d. It’s a Letter from Lyfandsr * but fomc part of it has fo nigh a relation to the Caufe of all my Misfortunes, that the reading of it has again revived my paft Affliftions with frefli infupportable Torments.-—— Thefe Words, together with the loved Name of Lyfander^ raifed fo great a Curiofity in BeUamira, that having gained Emelians Permifiion, Ihe immediately began to read the following Lines.
-
Lyfander to the Generous Emelia.
Afn certain, could you be fenjihle how great a Re--lief I find in that exceUent Goodnefs which has permitted me to /peak the Anguifh of my Soul, you never would repent the generous Condefeenfion.
Tethow infinitely great would the additional Blef-fing he, would you vouchfafe to honour me with the knowledge that yours, and BeUamira’.^ Health and
fm
ery protefiing Power, (who ft
Part III.	G

_	------ j----
are plead.d with
dZ
The P
fauhlefs
/
admiring PerfeBions that have fo nigh a Refemhlame to their oven Excellency : And how hafpy^ how llefddtvas ly in beholding that matchlefs Charmer I
delightful
iferable am I noWy hanifPd from
lortuting Racks are tri~
ding Mifeides to the Pangs the Wretch that loves y adores y and yet defy airs.	Why uoas /
made vcith a Soul to be fenfible of fuch PerfeSlionSy to know no Happinefsy but in obtainingy voho am deprived even in Hope ? But I mufi check the Reins of my Paffiony for fear 1 offend ; thd 1 would endeavour fy afaintDefcriptionofmy infupportahk Painsy to move your Pity. I know too wed my pre-fumpntottr Folly^ without being able to find a Cure the pleajingy but fatal Paffiony already begins to prey on the Springs of Life y fince Bella mira’r departure y calm Sleepy and needful Appetite are jled 'y and foony / hopCy my Death will convince that lovely Ladf Lyfander deferv’d her Pityy thtf Fortune was his Enemyand caufe thedompaffionate Emelia to excufe this Prefumption.
Bui tho Reafon forbids the Hopey yet fo extreme a.Flatterer is Lovey that I cannot help informing the generous Emelia, that fince /he has been pleafed to own a Friendfhip for mCy the propitious Powers have feconded it beyond my fondejl ’ifipes : For the truly noble Count Claronville, whOy from my Infancy ^ favour d me with his particular Noticey which as I grew increasdy has of late, by ccndefcending to a more familiar Intimacy y
exprefi’d fo greaty fo unequald a Friendfloipy that
I leant Words to declare its value. He this very Morningy (as he faid) obferving my lateDifcon-'contenty and endeavouring to know the Caufe, (tho^ in vain) ad length told me^ nothing in his power
/hould
The Prude.
* #
\
fhould he wanting to compleat my Happinefs i ajftiring me on pis Honour, within a few Weeks my Fortune fhould he fo ’vaflly advanced, as to fa--tisfy the Ambition of any Subjefl. Phis, only as it may make me worthy (infame degree) to think of Bellamira, has fill'd me with inexpreffible foy ; for aU the Count Claronvilleh Promife^ are facred; he ne'er deceiv'd with fiattering Hopes, his lafl Encouragement is certain Succefs to the anxious Suitor ; Volumes might be writ on his peculiar Vertues to the admiring World, whofe nice Honour^ well-judgd Refolution, andfieady Courage, never were corrupted by Ambition, changed by Interefi, or Jha-ken by Fear.
But I am on this pleafing SubjeSl too tedious, and perhaps may tire the excellent Emelians Pa-
Fhis one Hope encouraging me to beg you would f ill continue the fame favourable Sentiments to me, and intreat the lovely Bellamira not to refent this Prefumption, if Fortune, and the
tience.
»/
fieady Claronville, fioould declare in f
LYSANDER.
Bellamira haying read the Letter, tranf-ported at the extraordinary Change that .was like to be in Lyfander's Fortune, faid, I fee his PerfeDions are too confpicuous not to be efteem’d and valued by the Ingenious, and the Vertuous j for you know, Madam, purfued floe, the Count Claronville is the Ihining Pattern of all that*s truly great and noble. I know, faid Emelia, with a wild DifraBion m, her Looks, he is quite the reverfe, the Cruelty of hung ry Tygers are in his Nature——he cannot do a
generous thing—it’s all Artifice
G 2l
he has fb habi-”
4*^
L^he P R u D E.
habituated himfelf to deceive, ifs now become natural—you’ll fee thefe extraordinary Carefles are to delude that unfortunate Gentleman into bitter Ruin; and yet, purfued that heart-grieved Lady, how many fair engaging Ver-tues feem to diredf his Actions 1 Juft fo bright an Appearance betraying Angels put on, when they would corrupt the Innocent.
Emelia had doubtlefs farther explain’d the Caufe of her Indignation to the aftonifti’d Bell amir a, had not Elijinda that moment enter’d the Room; and after fome flight Talk, looking towards the River, fhe began to praife the finenefs of the Evening, the clearnefs (>f the Air, with the fmoothnefs of the Water: And at length faying, Ihe had a mind to divert herfelf on the River, fhe ask’d Bellamira to accompany her which flie being willing to do, the Pleafure-boat was made ready, tho’ they went with fewer Servants than ufual, becaufe moft of the Men waited on Bellgrand to the Hunting. Juft as the Sifters were going, the heart-boding Emelia told them Ihe had fo great a Heavinefs on her Spirits, that fhe would go with them, to try if the Air would difperfe it. But tho’ this happen’d to be very difagreeable to Elijtnda, yet refolving it fhould not prevent her Defign, and pretending to like that part of the River belt, where the VelTel lay, the Men wTre order’d to row towards it; but when they came in view of the Fifher-men, who feem’d bufy in catching their Filh, how wondeifully did Elijinda feem taken with them! She prais’d their Induftry, and pitied the hard Labour by which they got their Bread, and provided for themfelves and Families 5
T\
A
Fhe Prude.
45
imilies • and being defiroiis to advance more dole, and obferve them at their Bufinefs, with what Aftonifhment are Emelia and BeUamira feiz’d to hear themfelves treated in a Language unfit for the tender Ears of their Sex i But Emelia immediately ordering the Men to row back. Fear and Horror were join’d to their Aftonifhment, to perceive four or five conceal’d Men fuddenly appear, and calling their Hooks to the Boat, begin to drag BeUamira into the Velfel. Emelia's true Love and Value for that young Lady, was on this Gccafion feen; who folding her in her Arms, faid. You fhall not part us, kill us both together, for I will not be feparated from her. On which one of the Monfters faid. Come then, (at the fame time, giving her a pull up after Bella-mira) the more we have, the merrier we fhall be. Elijinda being left behind, by her Screams and Cries pretended mightily to deplore their Lofs ; but one of Emelia ^ Servants being ftruck down in her’s and Bellamird.s defence, jhe bid the other row away for fear of herfelf; and the Veffel parting from the Boat, began fir ft to fajl up the River, but when they were hid by the black Shades of Night, with all their Sail they made down the River.
Where we muft leave them, and the di-ftrefs’d Lady, and return to Lyfander.^ who ever fince the Marriage of Homrius, had had fo deep a Melancholy imprinted on his Soul, as vifibly discover’d itfelf not only in his Looks, but all his Actions j and Olarius^ whofe tender Friendship quickly caus’d him to perceive the alteration, with a Concern great as his Love, began to enquire into the Occafion. But Ly-
fonder.
a6
The P R U D E.'
fander difguizing the truly anxious Pains of his dofpairing Love, feigns he is difcontented at his forlorn State, his vaft unbounded Obligation to OlarmSf with being forced ftill to receive fuch unequal Favours, without a Hope to exprefs his highly grateful Senfe, by ought but Words. This makes Olarius think Am-
*	i
bition difquiets him, that he is troubled with an emulous Difcontent for being placed fo much beneath, in Birth and Fortune, the high Rank be always oblig’d him to converfe with : And, without hesitation, acquainting Count Claronr nitle with it, the Employment he heretofore mention’d to Emella^ was immediately got him.
But how furprized are they both, to find, in-ftead of this imagin’d Cure, his Difcontents are fo vifibly increas’d, as to prey on his very Health 1 This made the Count, who valued LyfandeVno lefs than Olaidus, tho’ not fo familiarly acquainted with him, refolve to take him into the Country with him, about the fame time that Emelia, with the beauteous Caufe of his Grief, and their Concern for it,
quits the Town. The inimitable
Accomplishments of that
young Gentleman gain’d fo great an afcendant on Claronville^ that from efleeming, he grows paSGonately fond of him j nay, fo tranfported IS he, that he does nothing but talk of him to Olarius^ wonders at the vaft Stock of Learning in one fo young, yet untouch’d with Pedantry > admires the juftnefs of his Notions, the foli-r dity of his Judgment, with the pleafing vivar city, and fprigntly turns of his Wit. Hal faid Claronville to Olarius, what an inchanting Manner he has, how graceful an Utterance,
ho^
Prude. 47
how.modeft, yet how very forcible are hisRea-fbnings in every thing i How perfedfly fine, how accomplifh’d a Gentleman does he appear! Oh I Olarius, cry d the tranfported Claronville, you are fit to breed a Son for the greateft Monarch the Globe contains!
But this Admiration ftill caufing a nearer, a tenderer Concern for that inimitable Youth, he refolvM to prefs him clofe, till he had learnM the Caufe, and by that means a certain Cure ; And underftanding he was then gone into the Garden, either to amufe or indulge his Difcontent without Olarius^ he fol-lovvs the Lover, whom he found lying on a Bank deeply muling, and he hears not Claron-^ n}iUes approach. He leanM on his Arm, with his Eyes fix’d to the Ground. The Count flops, attentively viewing the Youth j when at lafi: he perceives the fbrrowing Sighs break, forth, followed by thefe Exprelfions: Oh why, jhift Heaven, have you given me fuch ambitious Defires, without being blefs’d with one Hope towards obtaining them ?	■
This convinces Claronville, that reftlefs Ami? bition tortures the afpiring Youth, and his partial Love attributes it to the greatnefs of his Spirit. He immediately advances to take the difconfolate Lyfander in his Arms, and .ftrives to difperfe his Grief with fuch tender and folemn AlTurances, that within a few days he fhall feel no more uneafinefs on the fcore of Fortune j that tho’ Lyfander wonders and thinks fuch unheard of Generofity improbable, if not impoffible, yet it fo fooths his Paffion, that what he wifhes he is willing to believe j and the firft moment he can di^
en-
The Prude.
/
«
engage from that admirable Friend, he writes to Emelia the plealing Promifes, as is afore-msntionM. Whilft Claronvilie ruminating in his careful Breaft, how to fettle an Affair of the greateft Confequence, determin’d to go to a more retir’d Seat of his, about twenty Miles up the River, only accompanied by Olarius,
and fix Men
Lyfander^ a few Servants,
The
to
row the Barge, The pleafantnefs of the Seafon caufed them rather to chufethis Ihort Voyage, than travel by Land : They fet out late ; and this being the Night which was to bring ftrange things to pafs to the adoring Lyfandery and the then diftrefs’d, almoft-loft Bellamira ; they had not gone far before their melodious Strains were interrupted by terrible Cries and loud Screams of Perfons that feem’d diftrefs’d : On which, the Mulick cea-fing, they quickly perceived the Out-cries to come from a Velfel, which came failing towards them. But how furprized were they all, when more attentively liftening and diftinguilhing *em to be Women’s Voices, Lyfander like one diltraDed riling from his. Seat, cries out, ’Tis Bellamira ! -——— ’tis Bellamira
lia I
I am certain ’tis they. •—
his Sword vith
and jEmi And
then drawing faid to ClaromilV on
eagernefs,' bended Knees, For Heaven’s fake, my Lord, if you have any pity forVertue in diftrefs, or would preferve Ly-fander from eternal Ruin, command the Barge
to fave more
this moment to their relief. Worth than the World
contains belides.*
And being more convinced, as the Sloop and
their Cries drew nearer, he would ftamp and
fay,
r
‘The r
40
fky, That — that is indeed Bellamira ! Ha I now poor Emelia fcreams ! What Ihall I do ? Inftrudf me. Heaven, to preServe them. And having obtain’d Cluronmlles eonfent, who naturally pitying the Diftrefs’d, could not refufe his preffing Intreaties, turning to the Bargemen, he bids them to exert their Strength and Speed, promiling to their fwift hafte. Rewards like a Monarch ; charging them, as foon as they had fix’d their Boat to the VefTel, for half the Men to follow him, whilft the others flaying in the Barge, might reach them their Oars ; by which means they could annoy the Enemy, and defend themfelves from all but Fire-arms.
But there needed none of that Care, for •detelledly bafe SPhomafoy and his wicked Crew, were fo intent on Elijindcis wickeder Command, that they did not mind the Barge’s approach, till Lyfander had clofed it to the Sloop ; who then, quick as Thought, catching hold of a Rope that belong’d to the Tackle^ fwung himfelf into the Velfel, where the firft fad Objedl that prefented itfelf to his view, was a villanous Ruffian dragging Emelici by the Hair on the Deck. With one Leap, Lyfander reaching to him, ftruck him a-crofs the Face with all his force, faying, Monfter of Cruelty, behold thy Reward ! On which the Fellow flunn’d, let go his barbarous hold 1
whilft the Count s Men ________
the reft of the Ruffians from revenging their Companion; and Emelia looking on her Deliverer, whom knowing, Ihe faid, Hafte, generous Lyfander, fure Heaven has fent you to fave Bellamira, who dfe this moment is loft.
Part III,	H	im-
50
The P

pn^one, ruin’d by Ravifhers. He no fooner heard that dear Name, but he iHew to tine Cabin, and finding the Door fliut, his Rage adding unufual Force, with the fecond Stroke of his Foot, he burft it open ; where he found that innocent, terrified Lady on the Floor, with her Nails defending herfelf againft the brutal Phomafoy whom Lyjcmder made fenlible of his prefumptuous Villany, by running his Sword into his Breall:
to the frightned Bellamiray whom by railing from the Ground, he had the happinefs to fold in hisArms, his extreme Joy was more exprefs’d by Adlions than Words ; and in thofe moments tenderly embracing her, faid. Am I fo blefs’d, fo glorioully happy, to fave my Heart’s deareft, only Love ; together with the greatly valuable Emelia ! — But fcarce had the un' fortunate Youth finifh’d thefe Words, when one of the ruffian Crew flying from CIaron^ vilVs Men, then entring the Cabin, and feeing Lhomafo welt’ring in his Blood, takes up LyfandePs toofoon quitted Sword, and ftabs him in the Back. Emelia following the Fellow at the Door, feeing the Stroke given, with a great Scream cry’d out, Lyfander s ftabb’d! lyfander’s mmdiQP^ ! The Words going thro* the Sloop, quickly reach’d Clarmvilk’s and OlaHufs Ears, who were till then in the Boat; but on this unhappy News, getting into the Veffel, with beating Hearts make their Approaches to him j where the Count finds Zj-fander wounded, and fenfelefs, between the two Ladies. Emelia tearing her Linnen to ftop his faft-flowing Blood, endeavour’d by her Prayers to bribe Heaven to fave him j and
Bdk-
1
TToe P
5i
my
l^eUamira, with ftreaming Tears, wilhes Ihe could, by letting out Sluices of her own Blood, flay his.— This fad, and heart-woundin'g Spedacle, filling Clarowuille with Rage and Grief, he faid. Unhappy Youth ! what a Fate is this I to lofe thy Life defending worthlefs Women in the company of Ruffiansand kneeling down to take, he thought, the dying Lyfander in his Arms, faid.
Son, muft I then lofe my only Hope, my BeL
•dUIq ? ... Here the Father’s Laments were
interrupted by Emelia^ who" falling backwards, with a Shriek fo loud and ftrong, as her Soul' had gone from her with her Words, repeats. My Belmlle ! The known, tho’ long abfent Accent of her Voice, ftruck Claromilli^ Ears; and turning his Eyes on the fwboning Lady, if not in a moment, yet he fooni dif^ cover’d there the Lineaments and every Feature of Emelia. What Skill can deferibe the' Emotions of Claron'villes or BehviUit Heart!
for they are the fame at this time; Uefp'air for a dying Son, and Amazement to find a long
loft W ife........- at once feizing his Soul, he
was motionlefs as a Statue, and fo he remain’d a long {pace, But, oh ! as foon as he can recover his Faculties, and Utterance, he flies to the fainting Emelia^ td.ke.s her in his Arms with eagernefs, faying, ’Tis indeed my Emelia^ my long-loft Love! Then preffing her clofe to his throbbing Heart, he faid, Oh my
Soul’s delight! revive---blefs thy Husband—
thy BelviUe with one kind Look.—--------- But
finding her ftill fenfelefs with Grief, and heart-torn Agonies, he turns to his People, begging
them to help her.
H2
In
52-
rhe P
And, indeed, in this diftrafted Scene, the precious and dearly-priz’d IMtoi Lyfander had been loft, had not Olarius^ with lefs confuIioU of Mind, bent all his Gare to aflift that lovely Youth ; and one of my Lord’s Gentlemen understanding Surgery, he was immediately remov’d out of the Cabin, to have his Wound fearch’d and drefs’d; the grieved Bel/amira purfuing him with her drowned Eyes, whilft her unskill’d Care was employ’d in recovering Emelia.
But Olarius, throughly acquainted with the meaning of all this ftrange Perplexity^ and Aftonilhment, as foon as Lyjande/s Blood was ftaunch’d, and Life reviv’d, forbidding any mention to be made of whathad pafs’d, took him into the Barge, intending with fome of the Men to carry him back to the Count’s Houfe, that more skilful Surgeons might be had j charging the reft (who had Secur’d the Villain with Cords) to follow with the Velfel
atLome diftance
When the grieved Claromtilky and the af-flidled BeUamita^ with all their Care, had a little recover’d Emelia j ftie, hearing the Count’s paftionate Expreflions, ftrft tiirnM her Eyes on him, but when She look’d on the bloody ground,
Lyfanderg
------------------, ....- ^
at the fame time endeavouring to raife her
feeble Limbs, fhe cry’d, Where’s my Son ? O
let rne go to him, and die by him ! The Couh^
ftrove to comfort her with fome Hopes; told
her he was only removed, to be preferv’d j but
fhe minded him not. Groans, Sighs, and Sob's,
hinder her from fpeaking a long time, when
at laft, with incoherent Words, Ihe exprefs’d
•	V	-
^he Prude.
n
• #
her Anguilh, by faying, Let me go to my Bel--ville! Oh, my Child, would I had died for thee 1 How hard, how barbarous is my Fate, to know his Worth, to know Lyfander is my Child, only to be fenfible of exquilite Mifery in his lofs.—Then continuing filent a few Moments, as if by reflefting her Woes increas’d, fhe faid, renewing her diftradted Talk, I am certain he is my Child, I know it hy many Reafons. Then looking on Claronvilley Ihe faid. Cruel Belville, how has thy faithlefs Inconftancy, in a moment, deftroy’d thy Son and me ! To which the paffionate Husband haftily anfwer’d. My dear, and only Love, do not charge me with Crimes fb very diftant from my Nature; it’s true, I have wrongM youj and have been bafely wrong’d— yet by the Powers Divine I fwear, my faithful Heart has never ceas’d a moment to love you, nor has your long Abfence caus’d one changing Thought. Ah! reply^d Emelia, could you convince me of this, I might ftill be happy, too happy for a Mortal: But no Such Bleffings, pttrjuedjhe, are in ftore forme^—Sorrows are ftill to be my Portion-Fallhood has coft me—
Millions of Tears thy and now they ftill muft Too many, contimed
flow for my dear Son. fbe, I paid his imaginary Death, to be forced to weep them o’er again for my Lyfander. I hope, faid Claronville, Heaven will be, more merciful to us both,—but my Fallhood was as imaginary as his Death •, nor have my Sorrows been lefs than yours. Oh, Emelia ! pur-fued he, when I have unfolded the black Scene of Treachery, that has made us both mifera-|ble, 1 am fufe you’ll^ity your wretched Husband
54
The P
band, however your Heart is eftranged from Love. I fear, fd.td Emeiia,, fhould you not be able to jitftify yourfelf, myTIeart would own its weaknefs, and confefs how fhuch I ftill have lov’d, amidh: SnfTerings; and rather than think you could ufe me fo verf ill, believe any thing. You heed not fear, continued he, embracing her, but
\
ftrain a Fallaties I can clear myfelf. We both were betray’d j the truth of which, on my Honour, you foon 'fhall be convinc’d of: But till then, reft fecure, and do not rob me of a moment’s Love, by an uneafy Doubt; our Joys being already too much perplex’d, in our Fears icit Lyjander. Too, too much, faid Amelia ; but whilft we, by an equal fenfe of our *	* find fome Relief in this Fellowfhip
of MiSery, that Lady, csntinued Jh to Bellamira, who when the was releas’d from her Care about Emeiia, having feared herfelf, by a Flood of Tears Ihowed how Senfible Ly--Jander ^	had touch’d her very Soul)
whole Grief for our Son is not leSs than ours, has none to confolate her: The dear abSent Youth, in whom ail her Joys and Happinefs are lodg’d, perhaps this moment breathes his
laft.

Oh, ftabbing Thought I
Sure
Bellamira, purjued Ihe,
I hope, anfvoe/d that affliBed Lady, I (hall not; for the very fear of it has ftruck me with a moft terrible Pain. A few moments Emeiia forgot her own Grief, to moderate hers ; ^.nd told Claronville how paffionately Lyfander lov’d her, with how little lefs Tendernefs fhe return’d it—extoll’d her worth, and at the fame time lamented their generfl Misfortune in hi^ Danger.
In
The P
55
In which fad; Employment the time was fpent, till they landed, which Olarius took care Ihould not be before Lyfonder was fir ft carried to the Count^s Houfe ; where, according to his expeftations, this diftrefs’d Mother begg’d to fee her Son > which he oppofed by Entreaties, and too juftly inforced Reafons not to conquer her tenderly paflionate Defires, he aflfuring i^r^: that nothing but Compofure
thac the ieaft diforder’d Paf-
coidd fave him., fion, occafion’d
fet
ler by J Wound
bleeding a-
C3
This admirable Frierd informM her. That as foon as he was recover’d, his firft Queftion was to know if fhe and B^llamka were out of danger ; and that having learn’d from him they were both under CIarenvillVs Care, and coming with him to his Houfe, that News fo tranf-ported Lyfander, that the Surgeon fear’d it would have been fatal. Judge then. Madam.

whether the more delightful ’’our being his Mother, and bv
that means the certainty of obtaining this amiable Ladyj whom I find he paflionately loves, will not raife in him a Joy too exquifite for him to fupport, and in a moment deftroy what you and all of us fo eagerly, fo earneftly defire to fave. Emelia yielding, waited with Bell amir a, both tormented with a thoufand heart-breaking Fears, to hear their Doom from the Surgeon’s mouth. How do they tremble, and how do their Hearts throb, when he appears, before he tells them, the Wound indeed is very dangerous, but they hope not mortal, if right Care be taken I And how do their Hearts leap with Joy at the delightful
Words.
5<5
The Prude.
Words, they hope not mortal! Claronville\ Mind too is rejoiced, and all his Thoughts are now employ’d on Love, aid his dear iEmelia.
Care being taken to fecure the Villains in the Out-houfes, whom for fome reafon they do not think fit to fend to Prifon ; the Ladies, with Olarius^ and the now happy Husband, by a Ihort Repaft, having a little refrelh’d their harafs’d Spirits ; the Count, defirous to Satisfy Emelia*s Doubts, and compleat the Hap-pinefs of finding her, begins his Vindication in the following manner.
I muft, my dear Emelia, faid he, be forced to go back as far as my bringing you acquainted with Marimont; who dying, own’d that he being charm’d with your Beauty at the Play, began with me the Argument about Wit, believing your rare and exquifite Form had in-Ipir’d me with thofe favourable Sentiments I always had for your Sex. You know, purfued he, how his Wile prevail’d on my Weaknefs; and having thus obtain’d the Happinefs to con-verfe with my Emelia, his Defires increas’d : And if Love could enter into aHeartfo wicked, Surely you inSpir’d him with the moft violent one that could poflfeSs the Soul of Man, tho’ at the Same time he found on your bare fuSpeft-ing of it, that you with a DiScretion and Virtue never enough to be extoll’d, fhunn’d it and him,by refufing his Vifits: Which convincing him therewas no way to gain your Love> but byCuaking a Breach between us two, he at firft try’d every artful Infinuation to polTefs me with an ill Opinion of you , and thatlike-
W.ife proving ineffedlual, he at length formed
in
p
•>1
in his mifchievons Brain a Scheme that accom-plifliM his cruel Purpofe. Having by Bribes gained on your Maid to fteal the Key of youf Cabinet, by which means feeing all my Letters, he difcoverd the Cypher we intended fhould be known to none but ourfelves i which being what he Wanted, Swho, amongft other Ingenuities, could counterfeit any one’s Hand) he begins to put in pracSfice his Delign, by telling a Coxcomb I had a Miftrefs I was ex-^ tremely fond and jealous of, and that it would make excellent Sport, if one Night he would teaze me on that Subjedl: Which the unthink-‘ ing Fool giving in to, according to Marimont^s diredtion, he firft began to hint, and then ex-prefs it, in fo plain Terms, that fired with his Infolence, I treated him in a manner that mull have proved fatal to one of us, had not Mari-r mont pretended to interpofe; who urged, tho* it was very weak in him to boaft, yet before
I ought to exprefs fuch a defperate ment, he would have me fure Emelia was worthy of it, by feeing whether you would come at his Appointment. The Spark, inllru-Ded by him, pretended a great Surprize at my doubting it, vow’d he thought you had been too free of your Favours to have them efteem’d fuch, for to his certain knowledge, you frequently met Gay-fly at a Houfe that was maintain’d by accommodating fuch fort of Lovers.
It feems, fald Claronville, that MarimoM would not fufter this Fool to fee you ; he being too fenfible of your Beauty’s Power, fear’d it might influence him to unravel the Secret ; and the Spark urging, he was fure you would
Part III.	I	fee
Lhe V
Gay-fly
mate than himfelf,, at laft by his confident Af-feveration,; joined with Marimon/s fufpicious Manner, whom I .more relied on, I agreed, as they laid, to be convinced. This was the oc-
pitrfued the Count, of my coming home in fuch a ftrange Humour; and had I not been infatuated, certainly what you faid on that occalioni ought to have made me diftruft all the World, rather than Emelia. I thought I had enough warned you of any Contrivance, by begging you on no occafion to go out that day j . which Marimom learning from your Maid, he wrote that counterfeit Letter, which brought my Emelia to that abominable Place, and caufed his barbarous Plot to fucceed. With how great a Horror was I feized, when I faw you enter the Houfe, and enquire for Gay-fly! I had that moment kill’d you, had they not with-held me with all their force. Tihen^ faid Emelia, interrupting him^ I was not deceiv’d, when I fancied I heard your Voice ; you faying, Let me go, for I this moment Djill flab her perfidious Heart. But I was fo far from {earing k, contintted/he, that I endeavour’d with all my ftrength to open the Door between us; when a Perfon coming , into the Room, defired me to walk up Stairs, faying, you would follow me. I know it all, purjuednhe Count, with your Treatment pf Gay-flywho, ignorant of your very Name, was brought thither by a Love-letter Marimom writ him and the Ulage he met from you on that occafion, has often help’d to heighten their barbarous Mirth. But youwere,faid Claronville, purfuing his Difcourfe,
no fooner removed from my fight, than I began
The P ru i^ i: .
59
gan to think all that was paft a terrifying Dream ; and imagining feme. Fiend had ta-ken your Form to perplex and torture me, I ran like one diftradted to your Houfe ; MarV mont following me, (tho^ Ins accompanying me was hid from you by the Maid, as he lince told me.) Not but you, doubtlefs, heard in how wild a manner I behaved myfelf when I found you abfent, my Rage being So great, that he wbuld not truft me for four days by myfelf. I then endeavour’d, by hard drinking, to drown my Senfes, and with ’em the tormenting Fangs your imagin’d Inconitancy had caufed; that cruel Fiend owning, in thofe moments, he often repented his Villany, but having enter’d, he muft noyi' go through with it. By me he was commiflion’d to vifit you, and fee in wKat manner you would behave yourfelf, I
withdrew to my Father’s, to try there, if pof-fible, to compofe my alEi(5fed Mind j burwitb what increafe. was my Soul fill’d, when he came there to me, and inform’d me you were fo far from regretting what you had donOj or being concern’d at my.knowledge of it, that now with a harden’d Confidence, you permitted Gay-fiy openly to vifit you, whiift all your Words and Adlions exprefs’d a fcornful Hatred of me ? Sure, cried Erhelia, on hearing this, Marimont could not be Ib inhumanly bafe, for he and Heaven only were witnefs of what I fufSer’d ,* and certainly my Afflidlions would have pierc’d a marble Heart: Words cannot exprefs what my Sorrows were— nor Imagination fcarce form an Idea of them, I believe, anfwed.d Claronville, your Husband only could have an adequate Senfe of what you fuffeiVi,
l2
by

P R U D E.
t
* A
by the greatnefs of his own ; who like the Ilricken Deer, ranging round the Countries, fought every Diverfion to footh the Pain : how ineffedfual !•) it would not allow a moment’s Eafe. HW often have I wilh’d you . prefent, only to’revenge my exquifite Tortures, by murdering you 1 But certainly, in the midft of all thefe (as I thought) Confirmations ..of your Falfliood, powerful Love had brought mfc to you before you undertook that cruel Voyage, had not my Mother fell lick; and her extreme Tendernefs not fuffering her to part from me the few days of her remaining Life, I was detain’d by her Death; and the Night the Ceremony of her Funeral was performed, I received the Letter you fent me, of your fatal departure.- What Aftonifliment and Doubts did it fill me with ! and how^ different was it
the Idea I then had of you ! your Re-fentment being exprefs’d fo natural,with tech a felf-alTured Innocency, that I then began not to fear, but hope fome deceitful Artifice ! But, alas ! what fatisfadtion had I in that hope, when there was no, recovering you back! I came immediately on it to Town, and went ditedfly to your Houfe, ; then I flew’ to AD-Ytmont with your Letter, who ftiil carrying on his bafe Deceit, perfuaded me you were only withdrawn with fome Spark into the Country. In which uncertainty I remain’d almofl: two Years, when one Night it happen’d, that being out late,T was forced to return home a-foot, and the Moon giving a picafant Light, J heard the olalhing of Swords, and diffance faw two Men engaged ; when immediately one of them falling, I perceived the
S :	other
‘The Pr’u d e.
Other making oflf as fall as he coiild: and Humanity obliging me to go up to the woiinded Perfon, I was very much furprized to find it Marimont; who knowing me, with a. deep Sigh, faid, Behille^ you are the only Perfon I ought to be afraid of. feeing, in. this laft moment of Life, yet I am glad Heaven -has given me this opportunity to clear the Innocent, and to beg Forgivenefs for a Grime; which my Confcience has more lharply -reproach’d me with, than all my otherdfences. Oh-which, Claronville, he began to tell nie part of what I have already related j when his Agonies hindering him from proceeding, I got him removed to a Houfe,. where his Wounds being found mortal, he had juft Life enough to finifli his fad Tale, and figned his Cqnfef-fion, which I got writ by one prefentf re-folving, if ever I Ihouid have the happinefs of finding you, by that means fully to convince you, by how bafe an Artifice I was drawn to wrong my dear Emelia.	»
At thefe Words the Count taking out of a Cabinet the Paper, fhew’d it to Emelia \ "who having view’d it, cxprefs’d her fatisfa£lion, to find, whatever her Suft'erings had been, it was not either owing to the Cruelty or Fallhood of her Behille. And he proceeding in his Relation, faid, Marimmt ftiowed fo Sincere a Concern for having been the Author of all your Misfortunes, and painted your innocent Sufferings in fuch lively Terms, that tho* my Refentments were extreme, yet in thofe moments they were a little foften’d by Pity at his own fenfe of Shame and Repentance ; he informing me of ail your Diftradtions, your lU-
nefs.
dz
P R !U » R.
nefs, and his unfuccefsful Attempts; and added, if he had known your defign to leave the Kingdom, he would have prevented it, though with the confeffion of his Grime. But he faid, that happening to be a few days out of Town, he had not Intelligence from your Maid till the day of your departure ; and then you prevented his having any fufpicion of your De-fign, by telling him you only went for a little time into the Country, for the benefit of the Air. He pleaded theViolence of his Love, for the carrying on this long-dilfembled Villany, adding, that to the laft of your Stay, he had hopes that your Neceffities in time would bring you to a compliance with his Defires. But, faia Claronviile, however wretched he has made us both. Heaven and your Vertue prevented his Mifehiefs from being crownM bySuccefs ; for he died in lefs than three hours after his Confeffion; and by it, left me the miferableft of Men living. I once thought the Tortures of Jealoufy too exquifite to be paralleled; but here I found they were far furpafs’d. How did I curfe my too credulous eaiy Belief! As to my own Sufierings, (however great they were) I thought my Folly juftly merited them.—But for you, my Soul daily felt Sorrows to think how many Miferies your helplefs Innocence muft’ fufter for my inhuman Folly ; *—• I
feared your deftitute Fortune being infulted by thofe you went with, your enduring ft range, unheard-of Misfortunes in a foreign Country; to which was joined, with no fmall anguilh of mind, what hard Sentiments you muft have of me. Nor were you deceivM, anfwe/d Emelia, Heaven knows the thoughts of your cruel
'	Ufase
The Prude.
6|
Ufage alone made me miferable ; whilft Fortune was lavifli in beliowing on me her Favours. But, furfued the now fuUy convinced Emelia, you have fo fully clear’d yourfelf, and fo pathetically defcribed your Sufferings, that I know not how to excufe my long Concealment ; which, perhaps, added Jhe, with *Tears in her Eyes, may be Severely punilh’d by the lofs of our Son, of whom you have yet made no mention. No, replied he, I forgot to acquaint you, that knowing how fondly you loved him, when I was enraged againft you, I had him remov’d on purpofe to torment you: Where, as Marimont Said, he did indeed ficken of the Small-pox > but Providence preferv’d him to be my only Gonfolation, who, by your lofs, was doubly dear to me. He was in his Infancy fo very like you, that whilft I hugg’d the dearRefemblance, it ftill brought back to my mind, the ftabbing thoughts of your lofs ; tho* I often wonder’d what you meant by that Paffage in your Letter, where you with Hinging Reproaches complain of his death, till Ma-^ rimont explain’d it i who faid your Aflfedfion hung fo much after him, that fearing it might be an occafion of our meeting hereafter, he told you he was dead. But, my dear Emelia, faid Claronville, looking at the fame time on Olarius, this admirable Friend, whom I find you have forgot, though he join’d our Hands, knowing my fad fad Story, and fupporting me with his Advice, ever ftnce he was three Years^old, undertook the care of our Belville, who from that time was call’d Lyfander, I not thinking it proper to own him
till mv Father’s death : and then a Letter I 0 ^ ,
re-
educating
A
r.
P R tr D E.
reCeiv^’d
you, giying me. hopes I fliould onetime or other
you, I delay’d it, and' join’d with the Perfualion of 0/^n«r, who extremely charm’d with his extraordinary Inclination to Learning, was afraid the knowledge of'his Birth might make hiin grow indolent, and not mind what he might, perhaps, think he fliould not want.
Here Claronville went on to inform Emelitt of their late Concern for his Melancholy ; with the Palfage in the Garden between him. and Lyfander. On which that Lady fmiling, faid, Ihe believ’d Ihe could belt explain the Meaning of thofe uneafy ambitious Delires : And then fliowing Claronville the Letter flie had that day received from Lyfander^ on reading it, the Father was Surprized, to find what Friendfliip this Mother and Son had contradled for each other ; with the odd Chance, that w>’hilfl: the Son was flriving to plead his own Caufe in Love, he fliould fo wonderfully inforce it: and looking on Emelia with Eyes that ex-' prefs’d the pleafed SatisfaDion of his Soul, he faid, Who that ever was blefs’d with the Name of Parent, would not think all their Cares fully recompenfed, to find a Child have fuch noble. Such exalted Thoughts of them, as Lyfander here exprelfes ! But, purfued the Father., it’s not the Name of Parent, or aii’ auftere Afl'uming, that can gain our Children to iefteem, love, and revere us ; it muft be, added he, by fuch fair Examples of Vertue, as thofe of my Emelia, join’d with Tendernefs, and a generous Preference of their
Hap-
The P
6$
Happinefs, to our own, by which that filial Love, and refpeftful Friendlhip muft be obtained, that fo delightfully repays all our paternal Blelling. "■""■'i'"' ' And, indeed, purfued he^ flattering myfelf I fhould find Lyfandet Such, who in all his Words and Aftions has ex-prefs’d fo grateful a Senfeof Olarius*s Friendlhip to him, together with the late fudden Discontent that Seized him ; I refolved no longer to continue the Concealment of his Birth from him: And fearing Some Difficulties would attend my owning him, from the next Succeed^ ing Heirs to my Title, and Eftate, I had de-^ termined to withdraw from the hurry of Vifl-tors to a more private Sear i where I might with him confult on the eafiefl: Methods of doing it; intending to acquaint him with all my Misfortunes, and your Lofs. We had begun our little Voyage with this Defign, when Heaven, propitious to usj has wonderfully brought you to allifl: and compleat, I hope, the happy Difcovery.
Emelia, Seconded by Oldrius and Bellamira implored Heaven to make it Such, by the preservation of Lyfanderi nor was ClaronviUes Eyes So fatten d on Erkelia s ftill Angel-like Form, as not to pay a jutt regard to Betlamiras matchleSs Beauty : Her Birth, and excellent Worth being told, knd defcribed by Emelia^ the fond Father, on that occafion. Said a thousand obliging things, by which he fhewed how much he not only approved, but admired hiiS Son’s Choice. Nor did Emella forget, in a niott engaging manner, to expreSs her Obliga tion to Olarius^ for his extraordinary. Friend-Ihipi and tender Care in the Education of
Part III.	K


66
/
The Prude.
puttin.
r
Lyfander ; which he anfwer’d with Congratulations on her and Claronvilles furprizing meeting; nor did he omit agreeably to compliment Bellamira^ as the entire occafion of Lyjander*s late Melancholy, with the Pain they had been in about it. But in fpite of the Pleafure this happy Pair found in unfolding their Souls to each other, after fo long an Abfence, Nature, and their late furprizing Fatigues, theni in mind Reft was needful, Emelia was led by the Count to his. Apartment j and by that means BeUumira alone by herfelf, pafs’d the reftlefs Night, agitated with a thoufand perplexing Fears for Lyfande/s Life: tho’ at the fame time Ihe was charm’d with the thoughts, that now no Objeftion could be made againft iher yielding up her Heart entirely to the engaging PerfeDiions of that inchanting Youth.
The next Morning all their Joys were in-creafed, with the hopes the Surgeon gave them of Lyfande/s recovery. All their Thoughts were now turned on the furprizing manner of their being forced away, with what could induce the Villains to fo bold an Attempt j yet how much greater was their Surprize, to find a Sifter capable of fuch an inhuman Deed i when Olarius going with the Surgeons to fee Phomafo’s Wound drefs’d, he confefs’d, in hopes of favour, Elijtndd.s whole Contrivance, with every particular Palfage of their long Intrigue. With how much difficulty are they brought to believe it 1 till ihomafo gives them but too convincing Proofs of the Truth ; and though the Ladies were filled with Horror on hearing the Relation, yet the Count’s and Olariuds Aftoriihment was not much lefs, the
Fame
The Prude.
dy
Fame of her unequaSd Piety having reach’d their Ears. Claronville detefting fuch an m-human Wickednefs, according to the Severity of his Principles, vow’d to make her a publick Example ; but Emelia, with reiu6fant Pity, fears the expofing may harden her in her Offences : and Olarius joining in her Opinion, he yielded to their Perfualion, and Bellamira s Tears, who feels abandon’d
Sifter,
a greater Shame for her than that Lady could be
fenfible of, for all her monftrous Crimes.
Elifinda
from the

returning back (as fhe imagin’4) accomplifliment of her deteftable Crime, with a pretended Concern alarms the whole Country with their lofs ; their Vertues caufing 1:hem generally to be lamented. But Bellgrand, and the enamour’d Stanoriut, being more fenftbly touch’d, efpecially the Lover who at the Same time he i§ ftiidying how to recover them, rages and vows Revenge on the Author,* not being entirely free from fufpedf-jng the fair Dame herfelf. But fhe, with Arts fuperior, joining her counterfeit Grief to their real, pretends fhe had fome Fears that they were carried away by their own Conr fent j efpecially Emelia^ whole readinefs to follow Bellamira^ fhe, by giving it another turn, eaufed them indeed to believe it; having infi-nuated, that Ihe fuppofed Lyfander was at the bottom of it. By which, with a thpufand other invented Circumftances, fhe fo fully pofTefs’d theni with that Opinion, as to make them re-folve that very Night to go, in purfnit of Lyfander and the Ladies.
But MarcmdePs Health having fulfer’d top much by h|3 late Difcontent, to endure thq
Kz
fa

(58
The Prude.
fatigue of their fpeedy Search, he ftaid, at his Requeft, with the Chevalier de Blanville^ where he, and the lovely Lugenia^ in each other find a fovereign Remedy for their inconfolable Grief.
The Lover and the Brother, eager in their Search of the Ladies, reach’d the Town ; and having learn’d from Olarius’s Domefticks, that Lyfander was gone with him to the Count’s, they determin’d to make that Nobleman a Vifit, (StanoAus and he being very well acquainted) to find if Lyfander is really with him, or had only order’d it to be given out, to dif-guife his abfence with the Ladies.
But how furprized are they, and how' confirmed in their Opinion, and EUJindd.s feigned SuIpicion,when, on their making fome^enquiry, they find the Country People full of a confu-fed Story, that a VelTel was feized, and fix Men brought bound to the Count’s, with two Ladies, whofe Defcription exaftly anfwer’d thofe they are in purfuit of! On which they did not much confult, before they went diredfly to the Count’s, and asked for the Ladies by their Names.
PMcUay and her dear ClaronAUey were by themfelves entertaining each other with pan: Tranfadfions, W'hen they were told of the Gentlemen’s prefilng to fee her and the Count. On hearing their Names, Emelia immediately order’d them to be brought up, and receiv’d
• A.
them with all the Tranfports of Joy that fuch a happy Delivery could occafion : Tho’, after the firft Ceremonies were over, perceiving by Bdlgrand.s Behaviour, his Suspicions, fhe began to acquaint them with all that had paft j fjid.nda’s prelTing her Sifter to take the Air on
th
.A
The P
6q
Water
Melancholy
pany them j with their being Seiz’d and draggM into the Veflfel, and lock’d up in a little dirty Cabin, where (to prevent their Cries) their Mouths were flopp’d till it grew dark, and they had gone fome Leagues down the River ; and that then two ill-looking RuIEans approaching with Lights, by their Behaviour, made them fear the worft Misfortune : She farther inform’d the Gentlemen, that being fo much in the Villains power, fhe offer’d them very confiderable Rewards, to releafe her and Bellamira i at the fame time intimating to them, what Punilhments they mufl ex-pe^, if they proceeded in their bate Defign : And how that 7%omafo, a little flartled, began to relent, till the Ruffian (that dragg’d or help’d her into the Veffel after BeUamira^ and was the Perfon that flabb’d Lyfandery plainly told her, he was too well acquainted with both their Circumflances, to part with either of them, till he and Ihomajo became Mafters of their Perfons, and by that means of their Wealth. She then defcribed what Danger they were in, till the happy moment Lyfander came to their relief, and how fatal it W'as like to have prov’d to him.
Claronville then taking up the Difcourfe, told the Gentlemen, all the Perfons belonging to the Veffel were under confinement, defiring them to hear from the Villains themfelves the female Machiavellian that had contrived and fet thofe Wretches on to aft in that manner. Which Words of the Count’s not only recall’d to Stanorms^ mind, all his paft Sufpicions of
r'
70
*The P R u D E."
Elijinday but polTefs’d him with a tSoufand new ones : Tho’ had Bellgrand been a Perfoa of deeper Penetration, he had too fettled an Opinion of her Vertue, to have a Thought that way,
Ktanorius, impatient to be Satisfied in his Doubts, immediately accepting Claronville*t offer to fee Phomafi and the reft, with Olarim, they were pafllng through a Gallery to go to them, when an Accident happen’d tha&afe-cond time alarm’d them with terrible Fears for Lyfander*$ Life : For Bellamira, who was fenfible 1t,ow much his happy Parents were pleafed to enjoy a few hours undifturb’d in the dear Society of each other, often took oc-cafion to leave them alone, and by it give a greater Lpofe to her own Thoughts and Paf-iion ; which by her late Obligation to Lyfander^ join’d with the knowledge of his Birth, was increafed to a height not to be defcribed : In thofe Contemplations, how little does Ihe fear her Brother’s forcing her to marry Stanorius / and what a flood of Joy over-power’d her Soul, when flie heard he was out of danger 1 and how often did Ihe bid the lazy Moments fly, to brine the happy one, in which fhe may call Lyfander her own ! and in what a Series of uninterrupted Delights,. does Ihe
hope to pafs her days!--------- Not but thefe
charming Thoughts were often damp’d with intruding Doubts, that adverfe Fortune may ftill raife fome imexpeifted liifficulty, to fever them : Nay, Ihe often trembled with the thoughts, that he, perhaps, like his inconftant Sex, may change; and fear’d the knowl^d
pf his Birth might caufe him to ceafe that re-
The Prude.
71
Ipedlful Tendernefs which had made fo ftrong an Impreflion on his Heart.
In thefe pleafing, and fometimes perplexing Thoughts, as fhe was wandering throTeveral Apartments, fhe was at length infenlibly led towards LyfandePs, who had not yet been fo blefs’d as to fee her; though the Count and Olarius^ by degrees, had taken care to encourage him with the hopes of obtaining that Lady; which did more than all the Phyfici-ans Art towards his Cure.
Bcllamira finding herfelf at his Chamber-door, (which flood half open} and perceiving all filent, ventures firft to look in, and feeing no body in the Room, but the Curtains drawn clofe, tho’ fhe trembled at the thought of what fhe was doing, yet Love made her advance, and often flopping to liflen, fhe fometimes fancied fhe heard him breathe as if afleep; but her Ears not continually keeping the Sound, fhe is immediately alarmMwith the frightful Thought, that perhaps he is dead. Long fhe could not bear it, e’er fhe gather’d the Courage to approach to his Bed-fide, and gently putting by the Curtains, there beholds him lying on the Bed fafl afleep. How delightful was this View to Bellamira ! and how many new Charms does fhe difcover in that en-gagingYouth! His palenefs calling to her mind her late extreme Obligations to him, fills her Soul with a thoufand tender Tranfports im-defcribable.— But this fair Gazer was not long thus employ’d, e’er the Glare of Light, that flruck full in his Face, by the moving of the Curtains, wakes him : which fhe perceiving, attempted to fly away, had not Lyfander
flopp’d

The P
ftoppM her, and by a thoiifand Entreaties prevailed on her to ftay a few moments* But tho^ Ihe could not tell how to refufe his Re-queftjfo fuitable to her own Inclination, yet in Confulion often looking towards the Door, as if afraid of being catch’d in her innocent Vilit, Ihe faid, I owe Lyfander too much, to refufe him fuch a trifle as my Company, did I not fear \{ Emelia ftiould know it, fhe would never
forgive me.
Lyfander
a fenfe as if that Lady was become his Enemy, faid, (looking on her with a dejefted Air) Then how deceitful are all Pretences of Friend-fhip, fince Emelia is fo cruel as you reprefent! Or what inhuman Fiend, continued he, has fo lately changed thofe favourable Sentiments fhe was pleafed this very Morning to exprefs for me : She then encourag’d me with fuch glorious Hopes, as Monarchs might only defire to afpire to. Do not doubt, anfwerd Bellamira, perceiving his mifiakey but Emelia efteems and loves you far beyond all that you can think or hope. Alas i replied hCy fiHl dejeSied^ how little will it avail, and how very miferable am I, if fhe refufes to aflift me in the only thing that can caufe me to entertain a Thought, a Wifh of Happinefs ? Do not fear, or talk of Miferies, refumed Ihe, for I dare warrant you. Fortune waits to bellow on you her Favours in fo lavifh a manner, that I believe neither your Hopes, nor Wifhes, can reach at a more extenfive Happinefs than is ordain’d for Ly^ fander. The lerious manner with which fhe deliver’d this, caufing him to look on her with Amazement, fhe proceeded to fay, You would not queftion the truth of this, did you kno\V
with
i

The P
75
with what difficulty I reftrain from telling you things that would make your Wonder great as your Joy ^ but then, purfuedbeware of being too ambitious, and remember Bella-fnira only efteem’d Lyfander for his Vertues.—’ The Blulhes accompanying her Words, making the tranfported Lover to judge them ftill more to his advantage, throwing himfelf at her Feet, he faid. Divinely excellent Bellamira.^ do not imagine I ever entertain’d an ambitiousThought but where you were concern’d : No, added he, the Powers above are my witnefs, that all my Hopes and exrtavagant Defires are center’d in you alone : —I could wifh, I had the command of Empires, to convince you how” much I prize you above them ; and if I am fo blefs’d, to obtain your Efteeni, I fhall think myfelf far happier than the greateft Monarch the Earth contains. In a few days,/iz/d Bella-mira, (at the fame time obliging him to rife} I fhall fee how Lyfander efteems me, and fhall be convinc’d whether you’ll prefer me to thofe whofe Merit, perhaps, as well as Fortunes, are extremely fuperior to mine. But the paffionate Lover anfwering her with Proteftations that exprefs’d the Sincerity of his PafliOn,her Doubts were fatisfiedj and now believing how infinitely he loves, which increafing her Tender-nefs, fhe is unable longer to contain the fatal Secret: and looking on him with Eyes that fhow’d how much fhe participated in his Hap-pinefs, fhe faid, Methinks, Lyfander, I am too much indebted to you, not to wifh to be the Perfon that fhould tell you the delightful News that Emelia is your Mother.—— On which the aftonifh’d Youth often repeating Emelia,
Part III.	L	Emelia

74
Prude.
Emelia my Mother! without being able to utter
more---------- YeSyfaid Bellamira, purfuing bet
Difcourfey flie difcover’d you for her Son, when you lay wounded in the Velfel j and had you then, added {he, been fenlible, or could have feen her extreme Grief, how Ihe wrung her Hands, and how faft the Tears flowed, you muft have own^d fo great, fo uncommon a Concern could have proceeded from nothing
lefs than maternal Tendernefs.----------- Oh,
Heavens ! cry’d Lyfander, ( by what Ihe faid, beginning to believe it) is it poffible that the excellent Emelia fliould be my Mother !
Oh ! give me leave, added he, tranfported beyond himfelf, give me leave, my Soul’s Joy, to throw myfelf at her Feet, and hear the confirmation.
Emelia and the Gentlemen happening juft then to pafs by the Chamber to go to Phomafo, he ftaid not for Bellamira s refufing or granting his Requeft, but immediately running to Lmeiia, and kneeling at her Feet, he faid. If I am your Son, give me leave thus to pay my Duty.'—-—-	Though fomewhat aftonifh’d,
Emelia throwing her Arms about his Neck, faid. Yes, Lyfander, you are my Son^ ——my Child.'^=— Long did fte hold him in her Arms 5 the Excefs of both their Joys fuppreffing Speech, vented itfelf in a Flood of Tears. The Count looking on them with the fame tranfported Delight, waited, as foon as Emelia had releafed him, to receive him in his Arms: When the Youth firft broke the filence: Is then the generous Emelia my Mother ? Am
I fo blefs’d!----- Ohl how excellently kind
Wcte you ever to me \ and how did my Soul
re-
The Prude.
75
revere you, though ignorant of the Caufe ? And how, anfiuer*d fhe^ are all thofe bitter Tears recompenfed, which I fhed for your imagin’d Death, to find my dear, my only Child, the valuable Lyfander !—r- But, purfued Emelia, (having a little recover’d herfelf, and firft looking on Claronville, and then on Lyfander} you are my Child, and as the greateft Blefling a Mother can beftow, I here prefent to you a Father, whofe Worth you are too well acquainted with, not to make your Happinefs compleat.	■ Claronville at the fame time
open’d his Arms to receive him. But the Youth being too much over-power’d by this additional Blefling, only faid. My Lord,
\
my Lord! Feet.-
and fell in a Swoon at his On which, all their cxquifite Joy, in a moment, is turned into dreadful Fears ; his diftra^fed Parents immediately had him convey’d back to his Bed ^ nor was Bellamira lefs grieved, being prefent at all that pafs’d; and fcnfibly touch’d with her indifcrect Difcovery, by her pajenefs and trembling fhows a deeper Concern than
any Sorrow could exprefs.-^^-------------Which
Stamrius obferving, together with the knowledge of LyfandePs Birth, he is filled with Delpair: —'	-	But though he loved his
pleafures, and was no fl:ri6f pbferver of Morals, yet there was a Generofity in his Temper, that caus’d him to be fenfibly touch’d with this Scene pf paternal Love ; and tho’ his Rival, the Vertues of his Parents, and the Accomplifhments of that Youth, made him intereft himfeff in his Recovery i which was
L ^	fo
7<5
TheV
fo long before they attain’d the hope of, that Defpair began to fpread through the Company.
who preferred his Temper, w^hen he faw him wounded, now giving him for loft, deplores the Misfortune, with bitter Invectives againft the Perfon that had fo unad-vifedly acquainted him with it ; W'hich fticks fo deep to Bellamims Heart, that Ihe fwoons away; in which condition Ihe is carried to her Chamber before Lyfatider is recoverd, whom they are forced to bleed, (tho’fo lately wounded) e er any figns of Life appear."
But as foon as his Senfes are a little return’d, Olarius and his Parents are forced to intreat, and beg he would moderate his Joy, which was too extreme to be contain’d within bounds; he, with a thoufand Proteftations, afluring the Count his Father, he would endeavour to make himfelf worthy of the Honour, (lince he was his Son;) nor did he omit, by a thoufand grateful Expreflions, to alfure Olarius, he Ihould ftill efteem him as a Father. To Emelia he faid a thoufand tender things of his paft, regardful Love, and Admiration of her Ver-tues, and how fecure a Confidence he always had in her Friendfhip. Nor did he forget, amidft thefe filial Endearments, to put her in mind, his Soul’s Happinefs was center’d in Bellarnira, which he now hoped her Intereft in Claronnjill^, and that Family, may prevail on each to gain him that lovely Lady. And at the fanie time looking on Bellgrand, he faid, he nov/ had hopes they would not reject him with fcorn, on the fcore of his Birth. On
which that Gentleman took an ogcafion to intimate

TTjc Prude.
77
tlmate to thofe next him, what Symptoms he had always obferv’d in LyfandePs Behaviour and Manner, of a Perfon of Quality.
But the violent Emotions and Tranfports of his Soul, having fo diforder*d Lyfander, that the Phyficians fear’d a Fever might enfne, the Company withdrew, and left him to Reft : Where, after fome difcourfe on this Accident, by which means Belgrand and Stanwius heard moft that had happen’d at the meeting of Cla--vmnjille^ and his dear Emelia^ they both went with him to fee Phomafo ; who fully repeating all he before had confeSs’d of its being Elijindd.s Contrivance, with their long Intimacy, Siam-rius is fliock’d, tho’ he too well knew her, to doubt the truth. But Belgrand, who really lov’d and efteem’d her for her admirable Ver-tues, in fpite of the Probability, cannot entertain a Thought of what he heard, and rather fufpedled it to be an artificial Combination to blaft her untainted Fame ; nor did he fpare to exprefs his Doubts in Terms that certainly had occafion’d a Quarrel between him and the Count, had not Stamrius put an end to it, by thinking On a Way either infallibly to clear her Innocence, or more plainly convince her Brother of her Guilt. To which they both yielding, Stamrius obliged Thomafo to write to EUfinda a Letter, wherein he tells her. That his Companions proving treacherous to him, they had forc’d him aftiore, almoft wounded to death, whilft they were fled out of the Kingdom with their rich Prize; and at the fame time complaining of his deftitute Condition, |:ells her, he was obliged to fend this to intreat
fier Relief, and defire to know her further •.'	Com-
Prude.
Commands; believing he might confide in the Bearer, who had been very kind to him in that deplorable Circumftance.
Stamrius took care to have this Letter fent by a Servant of his, whom Elifinda was unacquainted with, andinwhofe Integrity he could confide : And after fome Inftrudions, he was difpatch’d away that very Night, that he and Betgrand might the fooner be fatisfied by the manner of her Anfwer.
In the mean time, they accepted Claronvilles Invitation to ftay at his Houie, till the return of the Meflenger: The different Cares that per-? plex’d each, made the Time tedioufly pafs a-way, efpecially the uneafy Brother, and the de-fpairing Stanmus^ who plainly difcoveFd Bella-> mircLs violent Paflion by her extreme Grief; which, together with the knowledge of Lyfan^ der*s Birth, and the Temper of Claronvilk, made him believe it impoflible now to obtain her : Nor did he queftion but Belgrand.s Ambition would foon incline him to confcnt. Thus finding Refiftance would be in vain, he begins to refleD: how little Happinefs could be expedfedina Wife, whofe Heart is another’s ; all which joining together, tho’ the Struggle is fevere, Reafon at laft gains the Vidfory, and he refolves, as foon as the Melfenger returns from Elifinda.^ to free that noble Family from all Perplexities, by generoufly refigning her to Lyfander.
But if Stamrius endur’d many Tortures in endeavouring to free himfelf from the Charms of Bellamira, that Lady was a thoufand times more tormented, when flie was recover’d from her faintnefs, and began to refledl on the Mif~
chief
The P
79
chief fhe had occalion’d. Olarius*s Reproaches (though he was ignorant of the fair Offender) made her think herfelf guilty of a Crime unpardonable : With what Horror was Ihe feist’d, on the bare Fear that it might prove fatal to Lyfunder ! She could not mpport it, and had abandon’d herfelf to the moft violent Grief ; y]nh.tv\Emelia came into theRoom, and finding her fo extremely difconfolate, that admirable Lady embracing her with tendernefs, faid. My dear Child, let me dry your Tears with the pleafiiig News that Lyfander is reviv’d, and will, I
live to recompence this dear Con-
hope, live to cern for him.
recompence
To which that amiable
Lady reply’d, ftill in Tears, Tho’ I intereft myfelf in every thing that contributes to yours, or Lyfander*s Happinefs, yet, alas'! what hopes have I ? My cruel Brother is come, and will infill: on my marrying Stamrius ; and perhaps, when he finds me relolv’d againft it, will re-fufe me my Fortune j and can I then expedl or think the Count will be fo indulgent to his Son’s Pallion (fhould Lyfander ilill efteem me) as to accept me without one ? Emelia fmiling at her Fears, told her, Ihe need not be in any Perplexity on that fcore, for flie was too well acquainted with C/<3ro;z^'^7/^'’s Mind, not to be fenfible that he would not fuffer her to be any other’s but Lyfander s; who, faid Emelia, I af-fure you, already efteems you as a Child, and has often faid, he thought it no fmall addition to the Happinefs of finding me, that Heaven fhould appoint the Education of Lyfander*s Wife to my care. By which obliging Dif-courfe, Emelia having freed that lovely Lady
from every uneafy Fear, fhe then own^d all
that
8o
Ttje Prude.
that had pafs’d between her and Lyfandefr, and how Ihe acquainted him with the plealing News of his Birth, being envious that any one elfe fhould have the Happinefs to inform him. of it.
But the next morning early, the impatient Emelia going to fee her Son, found him extremely diforderM for want of Reft ; the violent Emotions of the Mind, occalion’d by his extravagant Joy, too often proving as prejudicial as thofe of extreme Grief. Ana tho* Olarius, who had never ftirr’d from his Bed-fide, had inform’d him of moft that heretofore has been mention’d concerning his Parents, yet he prevails on Emelia again to acquaint him with feveral Paflages, particularly thofe in which Bellamira was concern’d: and that fond Mother neither conceals from him that Lady’s equal Paffion for him, Elijinda*s Contrivance, nor Stamriui*s being his Rival; and doling her Difcourfe wih Alfurances, that neither the Brother nor Lover fhould hinder his obtaining the inchanting Bellamira ; and to confirm her Promifes, fhe alTures him the Count his Fathers Refolutions are the fame. This had fo great an effedl on Lyfander, that his Joys thus compleat, the reftlefs Agitations of his Mind ceafing, and Sleep that had been long abfent, now bringing her balmy Affiftance to his aid, confines him in her refrelhing bands. When he waked, he finds himfelf almoft perfedfly recover’d ; which as fbon as Emelia is inform’d of, fhe taking Bellamira with her, goes to him; But I fhall not pretend to defcribe the delightful Converfation that pafs’d between the happy
Mothers
doubt-
t
The Prude.
8i
doubtlefs, thought they were too foon interrupted by ClaYonvilky who brought with him Belgrand and Stamnus : And thofe Gentlemen, in very obliging Terms, congratulating Lyfander on the happy turn in his Fortune, with the other Incidents that had happen’d, which he anfwering with Expreflions equally complai-fant, abundance of agreeable, gallant things were faid on all fides. When Stanoriud.s Man brought back an Anfwer from Klijinda, which being given to her Brother to open and read, he fcarce look’d it over, but in a rage he flung it on the ground with violent Invectives, not only again!!: Elijinda.^ but the whole Sex, accu-!ing them all of Deceit, Hypocrify, and Impudence. In the mean while, Stamnus took the
Letter, and read tflefe Words ;
Eliflnda ^oThomafo.
Dear Thom alb,
Vince you have efcaped, and are like to do voeUy • I am not much grieved at what has happen*d j a jaiit JVind to them ! or rather., may angry PVaves
m
the /IDeep.

ibine to Jink have fent yoi
Mi
'J	.	9	./
cover d j then come to me: tho* for fear you fhould he known by the Servants, I would have you fend the Perfon now intrujied to fetch a Key of the Garden, where my dear Thomafo fhall find his Maranda, and be convinced no Delights are to
Tours
of folding
MAR
Part III.
M
Or
/
at; DiEi
Or any body’s elfe, cry^d Stanorius, fwheiiL. he read the Letter:) But it’s.impoffibie tore-prefent all that was. Said againftthat abandon’d Lady on that oecalion. Stamrins, perhaps, a; little piqued at difcovering fodefpicable a Rival, refolving to be reveng’d, more inflames her Brother againft her, by acquainting him, he was not ignorant of other Pradfices of the. fame nature : nor did Lyfander fpare to inform the Company of the Adventure of the Mafque-rade, which incenfed Belgrand to fo high a degree, that with a Rage he vows her Death : And, alas ! how foon will that unhappy Lady pay too dearly for her mean Pleafures! and how little will her Hypocrify avail, to lereen her from the all-feeing Judge! Her cruel Envy, and implacable Revenge, join’d to her other Crimes, has already condemn’d her; and who can fee her very Lovers, the partakers of her paft Pleafures, now become the Inftruments of her Deflrudfion, without trembling at Divine Anger ? For the unpitying Stanmus having perfuaded them, that nothing but the confronting her to her Face, can make her own her Guilt,and lay afide her long-worn Hypocrifies, he contrived'that ihomajoy who in a lew days was recover’d enough to undertake fuch a Journey, fhould meet her jn the Garden, as flje had diredled ; whilft her Brother, with the reft, Ihould be planted in Places to hear ^11 that pafs’d between ’em. And accordingly Stamrlush Man, being firfl: fent to fetch the Key of the Garden, and all this Company Petting out with Thomafo^ by defign refojving not t0 arrive atEmelid.s till it was dark: and
1	^	i
then Iyjander with the Ladies firft enter’d the
Gai-“

fiTr-
per-
RtTB
CJarden. ----------The
loundmg Lhomafo, follow him til eeived from a Summer-houle, a eafily divceSttdSPhomafo'to Elifinda: ing her Arms about his Neck, received and welcomed him with a thoufand ftifling KifSeSj and the kindeft Expreflions of Love and Joy* But fatal would they have proved to mafo, had not that Company prevented a ftill horrider Delign, if any can be, beyond that fhe pradfifed on her innocent Sifter • who, as foon as they faw the endearing Welcome Ihe gave him, wanting no farther Proof to con-^ found her, they all immediately enter’d upon
her at feveral Doors.—---- Belgrand was the
firft that Spoke to her, whofe Refentment and er was fo extreme, that Olarius and Lyfander were forced to ftep between the incenfed Brother, and that guilty Lady, for fear he fhould do her Some fatal MiSchief. •'All that could be faid on her Ihamelefs Vi
ces, her pretended Piety, and alfaming Ver^
■tues, whilft her blacker Heart was pra^ftiftng
unheard of Crimes, was utter’d by the enra •ged Belgrand on this cccafion.
Ktamrius forget To reproach her with
Rival in fo contemptuous a manner, as alone was enough to drive her mad. Lyfander too, Jet her understand, he . was afraid this Difeo-very would vex her worfe, than his disappointing her at the Mafquerade. Nothing could equal the Severity of their Reproaches, and
Ridicule,------tho’ the Ladies and Olarim,
in fufpenfe between Anger and Pity, ftood dumb.—-Whilft	without Speaking, c^ft
Ma
The Prude.
on each a wild furious Look.
deed.
And in-*
her haughty Soul being poflefs’d with Defpair to find	to find herfelf disap-
pointed in her Defign : Unable to Support it, fhe [ immediately (from a Table, on which there flood a Defiert with Wine prepar’d for 'Thomafo) pour’d into a Glafs a large Draught, which drinking down, ftie Said to them with Fury, I am now pafl InSults; and then with a violence breaking from them, fhe went diredtly to her Chamber. But her words amazing them all, they began to examine the Bottle from whence me took it; and finding the Wine in it of a darker Colour, and infinitely thicker than the refl, they began to fear fhe had done herfelf Some deSperate MiSchief, tho’ they could not guefs on what occafion So deadly a Potion fhould be mix’d with the refl of the Wine.
But, alas! they were too Soon inform’d ; for that cruel VVoman believing w'^hat Lho-mafo had wrote her, determin’d to filence him for ever with a Dole of Opiate imagining (as fhe afterwards own’d) that when fhe was free frbm him, if the Ladies by any means fhould be found, they could not charge, or Sufpe6t her; telling them, fhe defign’d, after fhe had given it to Thomafo, firfl to get her Letter from him, and then fend him away, e’er it had cafl him into an eternal Sleep.
Their Sufpicion of what fhe had done. Soon made all the Company follow her to her Chamber, the Door of which they were forced to break open, before they could enter : which So exasperated that deSperate Woman, that now, in the mofi abandon’d Language, fhe falls on
them
P R U D K.
them, and ridicules their Simplicity, in reproaching her Actions, telling them they are all fuch, tho’ yet undifcove/d, or elfe infipid Ideots; adding, if they had that Companion and Humanity they pretended to, the only Favour they now could do her, was to leave
her undifturb’d. ------But I know, continued
/be, mth Fury in her Looks, you are come to preach Repentance, and beg me with unfeign-ednefs to take care of my Soul: but I, purjued jhe, difdaining fuch Nonfenfe, Ihall difappoint you, who always adfed according to my Opinion.— Many horrid Blafphemies Ihe then utterM, unfit to be repeated; till at laft, Ola-rius perfuading the reft to leave her, began to difcourfe her, and urg’d her Repentance in fo pathetick a manner, mixing his Reproaches with fo much Gentlenefs, and fo tender a Concern for her future Happinefs, that though at firft ihe feem’d not to heed him, but reftlelly tofs, and turn about, raging like one mad i that excellent Man’s Diligence, at laft brought her to a fenfe of her Crimes, with the horrid Reflection, how foon Ihe was going to anfwer, where there was no Reprieve, that Ihe began to have a fenfe of them, and with bitter Tears and Sorrows, to lament all Ihe had done. Then owning^ the Poifon Ihe had drank Ihe defign’d for Thomafo, how did Ihe wilh for Life in thofe moments, to repent and expiate her paft Offences, by real Examples of Vertue, Piety, and Charity ? — Which, alas! was now in vain, — her generous Friends, when they knew of what Ihe had done, no Care nor
Medicine
lenly
P R tj D K.
lenly rehjhng, sat laft came too late to expel the Poifbn that had reach’d her Brain.
Emelia and the reft took care, as much as pof-fible,to conceal her black Story, and the manner of herDeath, from theWorld. Her Fortune fell
had her buried privately; and StamIfa^whowas difcover’d by her to have been her Confidant in her Adventures, was immediately difcarded from their Friendfliip or Acquaintance.— As for the reft of the Villains, they were difcharg’d without any Punilhment; tho’ indeed Tihomafo, not caring to truft to their mercy, took the opportunity of their Surprize about Elijtnda in the Garden, to efcapeaway.
But whatever Confufion that Family might be in concerning EUfinday yet the Refpeft all the neighbouring Gentry had {ov Emelia and Bellatnifay could not prevent their being vifited and congratulated on their Delivery, and the other happy Events. Amongft the reft, were the Chevalier deBlanville and his fair Daughter, with Marcander, Who in this time had prevail’d on the lovely Widow, to join with him in Wtedlock.
And Stamrius having, by an obliging Refig-nation oi Bellamiray put the happy Lover out of all pain, Olarms join’d their Hands. Nor were thwr Parents lefs happy than themfelves; Emelid.s long Sufferings being fully recompen-ied by Glarom)ille*s tender Love ; who daily made her fenfible, how much he regretted his too credulous Belief, andrafli Jealoufy, whilft the Perfections oi Lyfundery and the fair BeL
lamirUy made them the happieft 'Cf Parents :
The Unity, and the regardful Duty with which
ly^
*The Prude.
Lyfander return^ their Tendernefs, made them the Admiration of all that knew them. That excellent Youth’s grateful Behaviour to Olarius^ fo charm’d that Prelate, that at his Death he left Lyfander an Eftate fo confiderable, that it feem’d as if propitious Fortune was pleas’d to be aufpicious to them.
FINIS.

^J
fx: yi-
K
•
f
•? i
I ^
*
>'

►'i	^
A ^ V; > vi
*^Vi

A
/
> f i'/ -
r - i. : V
^ 4k	U*	^
.e-.
■ * . ' J X
ti
/ A '-'

f:.
t ••
< '
^•-i

tt. ', ft. '^'-

;T
- .*
» k
k
* V ** y- -
i,.;-* i J'l

3.
A.
> ♦
-X. V -«l<^
X
I ‘
: A

%)
r A -jf

a- '., V-:*'	.■
. 4
-=■ '•■ ‘vV
V" ;. ‘
f
V- f :
■

A.
~4 ^	.	.,-


'» A
- ►.- ^
V c.
V-' *•• '
-1 jfC ‘. '
X :..
:✓
CS- w
		,;i:
	.' T>: '	-
y:	'.»A:	•c;
•V.		
.A. if-r.	■df d 'riL	
^ ' . ^.
i f <•
r ^A'l
t .

z' -^-■ '‘r . -■
\r .	'Ji-
♦ >
..' ; -> -'V
' *■ '• ^
»- ,
\>x *
< • ^
• V
T • >
•'y;
, 'V ■ -•«e. ► ^
-T
• •.V^' • V . :«V	*-	'-:---

\.
• I
■V-. 0
“■ ** 1'
'.)
n
N
*
W • •	•
Jr A

■t. J •' • *■ '	
	
,r^ r.;	
	
	
■->r •iaf' •	
r drf	-*•
'. rV-7> -

#$&;■'■:N?s-V-
-';u-
<-h'Ch •	' ^■■
/ I

* V '•	.•
V - V ^■ v ■■
\

.. • r •
y -
*
53»f3r»lSV^'
\ ^

.it
. y.'.,' -



«
• V
V^.
I '
•C
§
^ V

.«,
^.T-V
• ^	T ;
V .F d>^ -‘Si
. - >_ -tit,- ‘*^iViiv.'.>jt;	___
■■ \ .v^ ‘
1 ' '


. N
■f
/

i
V
V.
U, of Pa


- * f



4.1

■ • * -;-T' •• ■?'^-.£...-
. \'~-'^.-'*A>'V -
:'T	(	.
S * ’ ' ••

>-
‘4; f A
* •

%• ' wfDV^
if. ■ ^i k-'irr:*h^i*kV
^'r- .‘••'D^'--	• ./
*»ATa—	s .

". .•»’<	•	s ■ - Av^ • . r .•*.-«• - -*■ . »■. jC •	• • • • ^ •.• '■■ ' "
	
	
	. .'Sr-C;^*'^
.- -vS*	
	
.-if-' ': ■N
•«. V...	/ ^
:
-i
C
<• .«
v;«-- —
■'^.N
• ' •	^ fc	-C" ^ ^
V	^AT" -	kA-' r*ic- --"•I*
v-'^'
■ »
5tV;r
»iV*- * #'

4*
•%.

A>'
A

* »
rV-.^'"





*i^- '•’c-iAte' -'r^-S'^' ■ -
• -^- :- •O'V-'iS'v '"ti' 'd. h
•• • r-	•.-- -	“■ • -



« '. L-'
. o.-
CV i
"DN.AnI"-


^ •• -*c*
.. .
*vr
:-■ S--’,:' »-	rr:- .-:
^; rc^-^Si?*'-4•• vc
ErA'T.rJK---
v'* V N.iN^CbT'S
."• V


-	”.■ j~^'. >‘



AS-F
: d	• -' *--'. - fri>f-'ri-.




. ' V ■ —.
' 'k: i
/
- .

•:* *vv.r .	.
rt ■	V^''
■ l^T:.


.'r	* ‘F ■ ‘t

r,
f
<
‘ ^
-V-
' * ■»
« 1.
:> .C-.;-


■;r;Wr-." ■■

>;i
..«• '■,«■.■■ .V .- • -
'v*A^ :.f	. ‘	1. ■ .
3SiiLss^^^,; -_. v
l#‘OT-:;
'-C	■ ' '*,-■: '‘'■
i '.'■-
J ,
\ .
5^
_ , s
A ? C
S iNCr^A

AC
Y, H

'•• . '•" '-s-.L* ''>.'•*« ' .•.VD''»> X«>'^-:-*-."' -' • , \ -' -. • .'- 		 - --.r..*'->,-. . •• •- ;• ■ . - ' ,- i ^* ■ * - * ^. i • •	'■ ^0‘‘V • ■ • b ^	0/ .-. 5 . „ • ‘ •. Ay •• ■ Aitf
		. V'
s		'•- *ir ' •-.
		■ ■ ■
	• * ' ^ •	• / ' •V'* h
• S'

I
'f -. •
0
>»
. >
.	f *






:^r
,-<» V

X ’J
i,t
1(9' I I M
1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11 (A)	12	13	14	15
39.12	65.43	49.87	44.26	55.56	70.82	63.51	39.92	52.24	97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06	62.15
13.24	18.11	-4.34	-13.80	9.82	-33.43	34.26	11.81	48.55	-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19	-1.07
15.07	18.72	-22.29	22.85	-24.49	-0.35	59.60	-46.07	18.51	1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28	0.19
D50 llluminant, 2 degree observer
Density
49.25
-0.16
0.01
38.62
-0.18
-0.04
28.86
0.54
0.60
16.19
-0.05
0.73
8.29
■0.81
0.19
3.44
•0.23
0.49
31.41
20.98
-19.43
72.46
■24.45
55.93
72.95
16.83
68.80
29.37
13.06
-49.49
54.91
-38.91
30.77
1 J			1 *
27	28	29	30
43.96	82.74	52.79	50.87
52.00	3.45	50.88	-27.17
30.01	81.29	-12.72	-29.46
0.75
0.98
1.24
1.67
2.04
2.42
Colors by Munsell Color Services Lab ^