RARE BOOK COLLECTION
LIBRARY
UNIVERSITY:^
PENNSYLWvNIA
( ;
THE
180« .,
HISTORY
t
O	F
i
I •
MISS SOMMERVILE.
' Written by ^ Lady.
*
'	*	*	t
•	■ s
IN TWO V O L U M E
VOL. lAZ
f f'	'
... i i ib m ■■■■■■ ii n
%
t '
DUBLIN;
Printed by D. Chamberlaine, W. SleatoRj J. Potts, J. Williams, and C. Ingham.
M,DCC,LXIX.
i
,s
7 '
■ *
Am
# 00
SW!	SsS^ W
=iC6S(i^ W sW< W w ?#W
THE
HISTORY
O F
MISS SOMMERVILE.
I
I	<^<^<^<^C5j^x$oc^c^c^i:^§c^c^o^c^jo^
!	L E T T E R I.
I
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
Holyhead, Thurjday, 0£l. 20._
, -^••,oo»."S"H[E perv#‘,rre. lu^urt-<>«r ot the winds still . . I T I continues; and it is to very little pur-•S-.ooo....^-. pofe that your brother and I have ex-pofed ourfelves to ninety miles rough travelling, over mountains no lefs dreary than tremendous,
* and vallies devoid of every pleafing vestige of ' fertility.
But you tell me, this is not the feaSon for gay fcenes; and, that even St. James’s Park is stripp’d of its lovelinefs, and wears a difmal winterly aS-1 pe6t.—Judiciousty obferved. But, my good I Harry, you, who retain poffestlon of very many i blestings, by no means inferior to the beauties of ’ the fpring, cannot be infenSible of the cruel difi I parity of oui prefent circumstances.
S' The play-houfes are open for your reception, L*-where you may abundantly pleafe both the eye
" VoL. I.	B	and
r
2	The history op
and the ear ; you are within .the reach of elegant and entertaining converfe; and not excluded the circles of friendship ; nor unhappily banished the Smiles of the fair. You are not confined to the narrow precindts of an ill-contrived inn ; can vary your profpefis at will; nor is your fight ioffend-edj or fleep interrupted, by the boisterous ele* ment that is fo perpetually breaking in upon us.
This impatient-headed youth !—But he shall not find me fo complying for she future. At Parkgate we had a few rational companions;—■ but here, not even the confolation of one fellow-fufferer to chear our drooping fpirits.—Such an evening have we pasted! You would compastlo-nate me,'were I capable of defcribing it — But I hear the rattle of carriages.—Reviving found ! It must be dreadful company indeed that would not, at this period, be acceptable—I v/ill endeavour to steal a view of them as they alight.
On my wort), Rdf! d ppearance!-------One
two,----male beings ;---a female,- —young
and handfome, by Jupiter! — another, past her
meridian ! fear ;-but no matter :--what are
externals, hey, philofopher ?—A cultivated mind is not incompatible with an unengaging form ; and time, that hard-hearted fpoiler of blooming graces, lends a willing hand to improve intellectual ones.
To the .elderly lady I will, therefore, attach myfelf, and Bob is best qualified to amufe the green in years. His want of fire may perhaps, be tolerated by Some gentle Sentimental female, just emerging into life, and as yet a jlranger to ; quadrille and man ; but will ever prove an impediment to more lively, more intelligent connexions.
It :
Miss SOMMERVILE. 3
It must be my bussnefs to introduce both him and myfelf to theSe strangers ; for Such is his indolence, or shynefs of difposttion, that he would mope, for ever in retirement, rather than shove himfelf, notwithstanding the traveller’s privilege, into any company, without previous parade or invitation.
What is genuine politenefs, innate benevolence, or even an extravagant share of literary knowledge, when compared with effrontery, finesse, and vivacity ? What, I fay, but pretty lumpy possessions. Secretly defpifed by the ladies, and openly ridiculed by the gentlemen of this brilliant age ?
Friday noon.
I believe you are not perSonally acquainted with the earl of Kennington. His whimfical character, however, is by no means unknown to you ; affe6tedly wife, and foppishly fantastical.—Would fate hadtiiwi un ftmTc-tither shores!—BuC his daughter, niece, and beloved companion, may, perhaps, compenfate his ab-furdity.
I had not an opportunity of Saluting them last night; but as his lordship is an early rifer (and you know my custom), we were upon the most friendly terms imaginable before the breakfast hour arrived.
I would have retired when the ladles entered, but his lordship prevented me.
'We must unite, we must unite, (cried he
with a twirl of his hand) for our common ‘‘ emolument. Relations are the most infipid “ companions in nature. The girls will thank “ me for procuring them gallants, and I can only “ lament that you have not a Sister to prefent “ us in turn.—But your friend, let him be pro-
B 2	“ duced ;
4-	The HISTORY of
« duced; we will never feparate more on this fide the water.”
Bob was far from being delighted witn sti& lordship’s proposal:	You are an odd fellow,
(Said he peevishly to me) and never happy but when forming connedlions that are difagree-
able to me. Your Parkgate friends-----”
Were very decent people, Bob, tho’ not< exa£Uy Suited to your taste: — but be not dissatisfied ; for i promife you, if, upon trial, you difapprove of what I have now done, 1 ** will never more attempt to constrain your in-** clination.”
Down we went.
Abundance of lively things were circulated at breakfast ; but I will give you the figures previous to the converfation..
Lord Kennington is fomewhat turned of threescore, though the gaiety of his drefs, and a pretty youthfulnel® in his behaviors are calculated to convey a very different opinion. His perfon and understanding, in their natural state, I apprehend to be far from defpicable, however justly his vanity may come under that denomination.— But you will fee him best in his own light; his language is pi6turefque, and occafionally introduced, will paint him to your imagination in stronger colours than the most minute defeription.
Mr. Shiigburgh is a distant relation of his lordship’s, and his constant companion. 1 he early part of his life was Spent at Sea. He has much more good-nature than refinement; enters into his friend’s jest and his own with equal hearti-nefs; and fo happily blends the roughnefs and benevolence of his difpoSition, that you are at a lofs to determine which is most valuable.
Lady
Miss SOMMER VILE.	7
^ ing) becaufe he loved her.—He i§ dead how-ever; and she is returned upon her relations “ hands, without any profpeft,- notwithstanding the good chance my want of a fon gave her “ of being my ladyship.—The girl I keep out << charity, and should not doubt of diipostng “ of her to advantage,-if she would pleafe to “ brighten up a littlo: she is not a bad figure, “ Mr. Bradshaw, but wants animation.”
Pretty creature, how I pity her ! Slight in* deed, must besher dependance on fuch a shuttlecock. Lady Sarah is cruelly Supercilious towards her in her behaviour, from reafons too obvious; but it requires Some degree of understanding, as well as goodnefs of heart; to behold Superior
excellence with complacence.
We are to have a ccncert this evening. A
flute, the property of my Lord’s postillion,
N ji^'Tpaion with Lady Sarah’s	be^
round;r-W, - ...	indeed,, would gopd
be produced‘oul: of evib Nor dught we, Harry,
to be too much difcompolbd by perverSe incidents
in general ; as untoward beginnings frequently.
precede happy terminations.	^
If the infirmity of your brother’s constitution
had not induced the gentlemen of the faculty to recommend his native air;—if we had not been wind-bound a whole week at Parkgate if the company we were there cast in had not proved difagreeable to Bobby, and incited him to drag me, most relu6lantly, to this ungain Spot j—or if the packet could have failed immediately upon our arrivalhad any one of thefe ifs failed, or taken place improperly, this miracle of her fex had, in all probability, efcaped us. But in short, I never was a conjurer refpefting futurity, or I should have improved many incidents, and guarded against many mifadventures, that have
4	The HISTORY of
duced ; we will never feparate more on this fide the water.” '''	‘	/
■ Bob w^as far from being delighted witn Ms lordship’s propofal: “ You are an odd fellow, (faid he peevishly to me) and never happy but when Sorming connexions that are diSagree-
able to me. Your Parkgate friends--------”
Were very decent people, Bob, tho’ not-exaXly Suited to your taste : — but be not dissatisfied ; for I promife you, if; upon trial, you difapprove of what I have now done, I ** will never more attempt to constrain your in-clination.”
Down we went.
Abundance of lively things were circulated at breakfast ; but I will give you the figures previ'. ous to the converfation..
Lord Kennington is fomewhat turned of thre#"'
^ shTJ^'h the gaiety of his drefs, and aC
' ■‘steps, oufJrnincl£>-aict^	_	--''calf'
be in ourfelves, we may pafs our time very
tolerably. , <	' d -
My Lord is the life of the company: I, you must know, take the lead cf your brother in his good graces. .Old heads upon young shoulders, lie confessed to me in a stiort tete-a-tete^ is his a*
•verSion.---“ Youth (cried he) is the feafon for
gaiety; and whatever is unnatural must be « difpleaSing.”, Poor gentleman 1 how little acquainted is he with himfelf!
There is that fool, my niece Sally, for ex-«« ample (continued he) ; she is fcaicely eighteen, yet must be captivated with fentiment; prefer-ring the care-struck brow of meditation to all the bewitching graces of vivacity. But her father was the very quintessence of abfurdity. «« He refufed a mitre rather than abandon his flock; and married a' woman without a shill-
“ ingj
/ • '
Miss S O M M E R V I.D E. 7
ing, becaufe he loved her.—He i§ dead how-« ever; and she is returned upon her restTions hands, without any profpe6l:,- notwithstanding ‘‘ the good chance my want of a fon gave her “ of being my ladyship.—The girl I keep out “ of charity, and should not doubt of diipoSing of her to advantage,, if she would pleafe to brighten up a little: she is not a bad figure, Mr. Bradshaw, but wants animation,”
Pretty creature, how I pity her! Slight in* deed, must besher dependance on fuch a shuttlecock. Lady Sarah is cruelly Supercilious towards her in her behaviour, from reafons too obvious ; but it requires Some degree of understanding, as well as goodnefs of heart, to behold Superior excellence with complacence.
We are to have a cc*ncert this evening. A greafy flute, the property of my Lord’s postillion, in- conjundiion with Lady Sarah’s guitar, is to compoSe the instrumental part.—The vocal per* formers are Lady Sarah, Mifs Kennington, Mr. Shugburgh, and my Lord.—Yes, Harry, I arn So hardy as to repeat, notwithstanding the arch ridicule that plays about your mouth, that we have twenty little Schemes of amufement in store, of a fimilar stamp with what I now communicate, as we wifely determine to make the most of life we can; and by our mutual good-hu-ihour. Supply every mortifying deficiency to which our prefent Situation expofes us.—Where there is humility and benevolence, there whll be hap-pinefs. I pity the heart that from refinement has lost all capacity for delight, no lefs than I defpife it when polished out of its fincerity.
Bob’s Spirits are brushed up furprifingly.—-He bids defiance to the horrors in Mifs Kenning-
B 4	ton’s
/
8	The HISTORY of
*
ton’s preSence? and in her abSence has not leisure to fall into them ; — her idea,—the contemplation of her dear idea finding him constant employment : but will not the remedy prove, at the long run, of worSe confequence than the difeafe ?
In truth, he is far gone already, though unperceived by himfelf, in the labyrinth of love the path pleafant, the winding imperceptible ; but to return would be the difficulty ; nor can I, unexperienced as I am in Such Soft matters, lend him much astistance.—Befid^s, it is cruel on many occafions to undeceive us.—Give the child his rattle, and the madman his crown,—I will neither rob the one nor the other; consequently, Harry, your brother’s inclinations (unleSs most egregiousty erroneous,)- will not be condemned, or oppofed, by his and your affectionate
Frank Bradshaw.
i if ^	» ft* ^	• IT ^	* ft*	• ftr %	• ft* *ft • ftl* %	» IT ^ S	^
LETTER III.
MiSs Kennington to Mifs Carey.
Holyhead^ Sunday^ Obt. 23.
A Las, my dear friend, you are greatly deceived in the opinion you entertain of my happineSs! It is true, I am not only delivered from every apprehenfion of pecuniary distrefs, but advanced to a state of affluence beyond my most flattering expectations.
But have I not many cruel remembrances to Support ?—My beloved, my valuable father, is
he
Miss SOMMERVILE. 9
he not lost to me for ever ?—My tender, my indulgent mother,—her circumstances have compelled her to forSake me ;—and that blessed peace and tranquility I was wont to enjoy, have sted my breast, never more to return.—Return! oh how impossible !—can peace and tranquility dwell—^^-but no matter.—Yet indeed, my dear, a dependant is by no means an eligible condition, especially when aggravated, as mine is, by the caprlcioufnefs and ill-nature of my temporary benefactors.
I will not, however, oppreSs you with complaints., Take a genuine description of my circumstances; and Ihould you difeover pride and : perverfenefs>. rather than real calamity, to be the Source of my diScontent, fet me right, I befeech. . you, nor be Sparing, of reproof.
I need not ,toucst upon the dire particulars of that affliction and distreSs my mother and I experienced, during the first three Succeeding months after my father’s deceaSe. *-
Confeious of the necessity of casting about for feme means for future provifion, and unable to ' determine which would be most falutary, we paf-fed our days and nights-in equally unavailing anxiety and‘ lamentation; 5 The Small Sum that remained, by its vifible decreafe, at lengthy however, rouzed us to the reSolution of trying our : interest with our friends.
My mother’s family were r willing to receive ; her as a sharer in their limited fortunes, provid- -ed my father’s relations would vouchsafe to bestow Some consideration upon me. How gladly would I have Submitted toThe narrowest circumstances, to have avoided a fatal Separation from my only parent! — It is, however past; and I
must be Satisfied i
B < s	Application
to The HISTORY of
Application was immediately made to Lord Kennington, who confented to take me under his protedlion with a much better grace than was expedled. •—The partingWell, that too is over, and shall be forgotten.
I arrived in the evening at his Lordship’s.—-How my poor heart beat with painful apprehen-lions.-—I Sent in my name.—Humility was no stranger to me in theory, but pradlically I had Seldom had occaSion to know it.
Mr. Shugburgh instantly appeared.—He beheld me a few moments in Silence.—His features hefpoke the utmost kindnefs.— “ You are wel-“ come, (faid he), my- little friend (with an a-“ greeable warmth), kindly welcome to your new home ; and if your appearance has but ‘‘ the fame effedt upon' his Lordship’s heart it has had on mine, you will have no reafon to be distatisfied 'vith his reception of you.”
My tears — be must understand their meaning—“ He is, my dear, most Angularly hu-“ mane.”—And as we entered her Ladyship’s dresting-room, where the father and daughter were engaged at backgammon, he pressed my hand with compassionate Significance.
Lady Sarah was too attentive to the game, to pay any regard to my entrance.—She had the box in her hand, obtained an advantage of confe-quence,and begged my Lord, who Snatched up his glafs in order to furyey your niiferable friend, to ihind what he was abvUt, and not deprive her pf tliq p)leafure of conquering him at his own weapons, for a purpofe that would keep cool till he was at leifure to purfue it.
Mr. Shugburgh was chagrined.—Be feated "r mufsfaid he, leading me to a chair: “ You
and
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. h
and I, you fee, must learn to Submit to the “ higher powers.”
Happily for me, her Ladystilp’s good Succefs did not forSalce her, and in a short time she came -off vidlorious.
Now, Mr. Shugburgh (Said my Lord, rifing and advancing towards us), let me make my peace with you, by a proper reception of that prefent you have prepared for me. — Hah! viewing me through his glafs) upon my word,
“ it is very prettily contrived; only the polish, the polish, my friend, feems not altogether So high as. one could wish.—Lady Sarah, have you no curioSity refpedling your, future corn--panion
La 1 ray Lord (cried she), you are fo hur-rying.”—A cold falute was all she was pleafed ** to bestow.
“ Your name, pretty one?” refumed his Lord-ship.—Idle demand ! for before 1 could reply, he' added, as-recolledfing hiinfelf, “ Oh Sally !— And fo, Mifs Sally, you have the courage to become an adventurer, under my aufpices, to countries yet unknown.—Your little heart ** though, I fuppofe, is not without its alarms.” Oh Dolly! never was being more oppressed !
'—This cruel levity!—The child of fo recently deceafed, and fo injured a brother,,to be fo treated !—I burst into tears,.to the great astonishment, and offence of my noble relations^
Lady Sarah ! Mr. Shugburgh!” demanded his Lordship with an affedted stare of amazement.— “ What haveO Said? Is either my ao-“ center countenanceTo-tremendous as to occa-Sion this ?” '—But, turning carelefsly upon his heel, Thefe arc early days; we shall, per-
haps,
12 The HISTORY of
‘‘ haps, come to a right understanding at Some “ future period.”
You may be certain my confuston and distreSs was rather augmented than diminished by this unkind fpeech.'—-All my efforts were vain, and agonies, I fear proud agonies, shook my very foul.
Mr. Shugburgh’s eyes betrayed the most humane fympathy. How Soothing every shadow of tendernefs, to the fuffering heart!-—My Lord and Lady were at l#ngth So confiderate as to withdraw.
Mr. Shugburgh, the instant he perceived we were alone, ufed many pathetic arguments to comfort and confcle me.
“ I know not whyitis (faid he), but however “ rough my nature, or boisterous my education, I am perfeftly effeminate upon thefe pccafi-ons.—But, my dear Mifs Kennington, do not “ Suffer your change of condition to deprefs you “ beyond meafure.—Remember from what “ hand your chastifements are derivedit is ours to Submit.-—You may at all times com-mand my best Services.—I loved your father; “ I cannot, therefore, do other than love and ** pity his defencelefs offspring. — My friend has his peculiarities. Lady Sarah her little odd fan-cies, but you will not find it difficult to pleafe “ them, when once you are acquainted with their difpofitions. The misfortune is, that an “ unhappy prejudice against your mother, will ‘‘ prevent your establishing yourfelf fb immedi-** ately in their affebtions as you otherwife wouldbut you Seem to have no Small share “ of understanding, and will make the best of a “ di'agreeable buffnefs.”
Is he not a good creature ?—-Oh! my friend,
how
Miss SOMMER V I L E. 13
how Superior are the feelings of. humanity to-
But I will forbear.
So foon as I was Somewhat oompofed, I begged this worthy man would acquaint my Lord and Lady, that L was impatient to obtain their forgivenefs of my folly.—They received my mestage gracioufly, dbndefcended to fay a few obliging things-, and tl^^^pper-hour passed a--' way with tolerable fatisB^^n..
But 1 labour under on^reat mortification.—
I am compelled to participate Lady Sarah’s a-partment, to which restraint alone my long fi-lence has been owing: for,., notwithstanding all' my endeavours, I could never meet with a proper opportunity of exercifing my pen.r—For the neceffity I was under till this time,., of making her privy to all I wrote, was exa6Uy the fame thing as a final prohibition.
We remained only three days in London aff ter my arrival, and are now at Holyhead, waiting; for a wind to convey us to Dublin ; and though, our journey afforded no important matter, I believe I shall have it in my power to divert you
from hence. Lady Sarah-------But I can no
more at prefen t.
Monday Morn. .
Behold me once more at your devotion.—But before I begin with her Ladyship {as I think myfelf pretty fafe), I will charge you with one important commission.
ii beg you will endeavour to fee my dear mother as foon as possible, after this reaches you, and tell her how alive I am to every dutiful and affeflionate Sentiment; but that ssnce her circumstances are limited, almost in an equal degree with my time for writing, I will double tax
your
The H I S T O R Y of
your friendship, and make you the channel of:
w ,	*	. ■	•
©ur correfpondence.
To you I will remit my every wish and adventure, and she must be fatissted with receiving, them at fecond-hand ; for I dare believe, that there is no fault 1 could commit, that would be more heinous in the fight of thefe relations than being detected in duly honouring my mother,, notwithstanding it is a divine and indifpenfable command.—Intreat her, if poshble, to lofe her-fenfe of the calamity we have fustained, in the pleaSing reflediion, of the glorious advantages it has been produdlive of to that best of hushands and of fathers.—The fubjedl is too tender to be dwelt upon ;, therefore,, my good girl, in one word, I befeech you to ufe your best endeavours to confole her;-—and may heaven defend us from repining at its will!—A moment’s recol--lediion, and I will,refume my pen.
I would have told you, but was interrupted,.., that Lady Sarah is far from being dissatisfied with her prefent fituation.—She is fallen in love, my, dear, with a man by no means eligible in my fight; but that you will fay is very little to the* purpofe.
His figure, I must acknowledge, is in his favour; well-proportioned; eafy and genteel : my objediion lies, against his manners and converfa-tion, as they are, indeed, by much too airy and volatile to pleafe my antiquated taste. Bred in fober retirement, I can but ill reconcile, my fell to. pclite irony, and unmeaning adulation.
Lady Sarah proclaims him unexceptionable t the finest, charmingest fellow she was ever acquainted, with, and the most entertaining ; nor is she happy one moment ur.lefs chattering with, or of, her admired’Mr. Bradshaw.
. ,	.	My-
Miss S O M M E R V I L E.
My want of vivacity excludes me from the,' honour of her Ladyship’s confidence ; but she has a woman every way qualified for So impor--tant a trust ; and I hope she will at length con-fign me to Some other, apartment, to prevent my proving an impediment to her favourite fubje^ with her favourite companion.	'
Mr. Bradshaw has a. friend, for whole I^e it: Seems he has undertaken this voyage, the very reverfe of himfelf, who is uncommonly affiduous to oblige and amufe me. His health is in a declining state. An ugly cough,.Dolly, too plainly indicates an approaching confumption.
It is melancholy to behold any one withering in their bloom ; but more efpeciaily where there is So great an appearance cf worth, as in this young gentleman.	'
Lady Sarah detests him for his stupidity.— How misjudging! how unfeeling!—He is, my dear, only detached from the idle gaieties of a life, that, in all human probability, he cannot long enjoy; confequentlv, has a.turn for the most Serious, the foftest refiedtions.
My mind, you are fenSible,. is aptly calculated to enter into Such fentiments. We naturally retire from the interruption of our gayer friends. —He listens to the fad tale of my misfortunes with viSible attention and Sympathy;—and I, in return, have an ear for—But I had best throw afide my pen until I have shook off the prefent dejeSiion of my heart, and not affedf you unnecessarily.
If I should have an opportunity of fending this letter in the evening, I will not add to the length of if, only to caution you to Secrete that part of it relative to Mr. Fleetwood from mam-nia, as you may very eaSily do, in the manner I
■■have
#6- The HISTORY of
have wrote it. I would not alarm her with groundlefs fancies; and, perhaps, she might imagine that my affe6tion is in danger, where my compassion alone is concerned.
Adieu !—You are difcreet, and will neither expofe the mother or. daughter to needlefs mortification..
LETTER IT.
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood,.
Holyhead., Obi. 29, Hard gales full in our face.
I. Cannot give you an-idea of the general fa--tisfadlion that prevailed in: our. little assembly , the other evening: every one Seemed to com-rnumcate, and in the fame instant imbibe de?--light.
The dejedlion of Mifs Kennington’s counter-nance gave place to a thoufand'namelefs graces;. — the vanity of ray Lord’s heart abundantly overflowed ;Mr. Shugburgli’s honest nature warmly participated his friends joy;—Bob was elevated out of himfelfLady Sarah’s features wore a kind of ambiguous meaning, that might eafily be mistaken for pleafure-and as to your humble Servant,words are too poor to Speak his feelings.
It must, however, be acknowledged, that we did not attain this Summit of happinefs without encountering fome difficulties. — Lady Sarah’s guitar, when produced, wanted a couple of
strings;—
Miss SOMMER VILE. 17
strings ; — trying circumstance! — irremediable evil I—negligent Servants the greatest of calamities 1—when, beyond our best hopes, the landlord having learnt our distrefs, accommodated us with a fmall violin,,that had been left in his hands by an itinerant fidler to Supply Some deficiency of cast), which, by the dexterity of a certain acquaintance of yours, proved a very pretty fucce-danum; and Mr. Shugburgh, with much humour, though little judgment,, upon half a dozen glasses rendered himSelf no inconfiderable-auxiliary.
We had congratulated ourfelves, however,, but a few moments on our good fortune, before we received a Second alarm. In the fame box with her Ladystiip’s mufic books had been depo-fited a bottle of stuff for taking stains out of mar-hogany, purchafed only two or three hours before their leaving London; — and oh, fad to* tell!—was broken in the carriage, and had destroyed the choicest eompofitions.
My Lord was infinitely chagrined ; not a favourite Song undamaged. —Where the words were perfedl the notes were effaced, and vice-verfa.~—S)om& perverfe star, he was certain, predominated, and it was in vain to oppoSe its influence.
Perverfe star, quotha f (cryed Mr. Shug-burgh) — pettish wills! —Here’s the Beggars> ^ Opera; it is not planet-struck. I’ll warrant you.—Come, Mr. Violin, give us The Modes of the Court.’*^
My Lord’s eyes fparkled approbation. We will be content (faid he); thefe unornamented tunes best fuit our lame instruments. We ** will go through with them chara6ler-wife.---I myfelf will ling Peachum; Sally shall do
justice.
i8 The HISTORY of
justice to Polly; —you Mr. Gaiety (alias ■ “ Frank Bradshaw), shall be our Mackheath ;—
‘‘ Mr. Shugburgh will enter into the merits of ‘‘ Lockitand if we could but have mustered up a decent Lucy, Lady Sarah should have
dignified Diana Trapes.--1 stand rebuked,
(added he, with an affected shrug of his shoulders), your difpleafure is just (she grinn’d most horribly upon him); but you have too “ much good nature to deny us. your-astistance we should be nothing without you.”
I whifpered a few pretty things.—Their effe6fc rewarded my pains. — I love to communicate pleafui*e when it may be done fo cheaply : — the magic of a .well-timed compliment is irrefistible^ —Soft believing fouls! they little conceive by what motives we are frequently adluated.—We lively fellows bear all before us, nor has her Ladyship’s breast received an unfavourable impreS--fion of your friend’s defervings.
Mr. Shugburgh was very drole in his part, my* Lord entertaining, and Mifs Kennington un- ■ fpeakably engaging. Such a voice ! Harmony’6 Self! Her features as exprestive as beautiful.
Lady Sarah was all fpiightlinefs, peculiarly just in every malicious or revengeful stroke, and , most feelingly breathed her love of Mackheath. Polly, it was plain, had another objedl in view but the hero was not exceptions, and all went Smoothly on.
Bobby touched now the violin, and now the flute, judiciousty ; his eyes, indeed, would feme-times rnistead his attention, but he recovered him-felf very gracefullyand though the moral of the piece cannot be defended, the fatire is admirable ; and, every thing confidered, I do not think tve could shave* hit upon any one composition
Miss SOMMERVILE. 19
tion that would fo effectually have anfwered our purpoSe.
But you are heartily weary of the Small-talk with which my letters have for Some time been replete; and if wissies could waft us tathe Hibernian shore, we might instantly fpread our fails.
And are you fure the evil would then be re^-medied ?• Cities and trifles are by no means incompatible; nor would folly be aught than folly,, however rich the foil from which it was produced.
But I have news for you, even from this remote corner of the earth, that willin fome measure difpel your diffatisfaftion.
We were most agreeably furprifed this morning. ---- Yet, by our leave, fir, I shall not reSist
the thrifty Spirit that now predominates, but reserve the whqle master for a future epistle.
Good bye to you ; make it as eafy as you can .to your curiostty ; for, posttively, I will have my humour.—Bye,, Harry. Ha,, ha, ha I
L E T T E R V.
The fame to the Same.
t
/
08. 30i
Here you have me again, Harry, this 30 th day of O^Iober; and probably both my letters may reach you at the fame time. — You may, without wichcraft, guefs the reafon.
What,.
20 The history of
What, quite offended ? — You had better Set the matter blow off its own way. — Remember how greatly you are in my power. —Your hand — good> good —^ and now for the news.
We were, I told you, most agreeably Surprifed the other morning by the arrival of Mr. Finly, who is hurrying to Dublin, with all possible expedition, to attend, his grand-father in his lash moments.
Bob was perfedlly in raptures. — His beloved ' friend, his quondam School-fellow, to be restored to him at a period fo unpromifingj was prodigious!— and never was there more heart-felt congratulations than they'experienced upon the oc-cafion; intermixed, nevertheless, with due paufes of Sorrow, for having been So long Separated.
I need not inform you, who are fo well acquainted with my difpofition,. that I am neither four nor phlegmatic, yet equally free from your very fine,, your very pathetic fenssbilities.
In fadl,, 1 am a kind of laughing philofopher; and unlefs the matter is highly consequential. Seldom Suffer my countenance to contradl a gloom,, or admit Sorrow to steal upon my heart.
I have long Since tasted life, or my vanity deceives me, with tolerable justnefs; and as I never found a fweet without its allay of bitter, fo l am convinced even the most bitter draught has its attempering fweetneSs. When a Satisfaftion un-expe^edly reaches me, I do not, like this pair of friends, deny mySelf the full enjoyment of it, by contemplating or calculating the lofs I may have fustained in the intermediate time; for you must know, I much question if they themSelves have yet fettled it in their own breasts, whether the mif-fortune of not having met Sooner, ‘or the felicity
of
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 21
of their preSent meeting, runs most in the stiper-lative.
On tlie other hand, when I find a mortification inevitable, I instantly fet to work upon it; and it must be of a most fingular contexture indeed, if I do not in a great meafure transform it. For example:
In the last vifiCi made at Blackheath, 1 found your converfation peculiarly pleafing; — nor did I for Some time attend to the ill-natured industry -of a feemingly friendly monitor, that incessantly whifpered me, it was a pleafure I must Soon forego.
Stung to the quick at being So long disregarded, the whifper was fwelledinto adeep hoarfe note, and fo roughly Saluted my mental ear^ that I was for a moment utterly overcome by it :—but, re-icollefling myfelf, I immediately fubdued this enemy of my peace. “ Begone, (cried I) thou worst of fiends; can it be any reafon, becauSe a blessing is ssidrng through my fingers, that I should not “ taste it most palpably? — Nay, So far from Seeking an allay, ought not my Senfe of it from that very circumstance to be infinitely aug-mented ? — and, instead of Suggesting the cru-el remembrance of approaching evil, would it not have been kind to Sooth me with the glad “ hope of re-enjoying it at Some future happy period ? — I will, however, most effeffually defeat thy little malice, by cherishing So be-nign a ray.” I did fo; the whole profpedl in-fenfibly brightened. The thick gathering fog of discontent gradually disappeared ; till at length my imagination, as if by enchantment, prefented me a new face of things, and gave my departure the appearance of only the first step towards my return.
You
S2 The H I S T O R Y of
You may laugh,; if you pleafe, at my System of philofophy; but believe me, Harry, it is the most invaluableof Secrets; for with a fingletouchlcaufe even Calamity to Smile. You will not deny but it is the interest of mortality to remove itfelf to the utmost possible distance from whatever pains it. ~ Our natures have a kind ol double fufcepti-bility, in fpite of ourfelves : the delightfullest fenfe of pleafure, and the most acute pang of af-flidiion, is equally Spontaneous: — but as we are happily blessed with a rational and distinguishing faculty, we are capable no lefs of moderating the one, than mitigating the other.
In the most trying exigencies, I grant you this power is Sometimes over-borne ; but, is it not astonishing when we Suffer petty evils to debilitate our minds, and tinge our best enjoyments? I do inSist upon it, if freedom of will is ours in , any instance, it cannot fail us here : and am not I myfeif a living proof of the force of custom, and efficacy of refolution,in conquering every peevish, unfocial, and dolorous inclination? — But, if you pleafe, we will return to the good company.
We are greatly multiplied within thefe three Nays. The gay, the giddy widow Bateman, having Spun out her period of felicity to, the utmost, is impatiently detained on this Side the wa-. ter. Some bussnefs of the utmost- importance to her interest requiring her attendance on the first meeting of the parliament. She has not been So little-minded as to guard against misfortune; and, should her delay be produdive .of confequences fatal to that interest, can confole herfelf with re-sseSting upon pleafu”es she had too much Spirit to forego.
Her Sister, Mifs Turner, neither young, beautiful.
Miss SOMMERVILE. 23
tiful, nor engaging, treads the Same idle round; and only
-----aflcs the gods to give
The mighty bleffing whilft Ihe lives, to live.
1 have no Small reaSon to apprehend I shall have my hands Sull. Is it not amazing, that in a country where men are So plentiSul, and mixed companies So general, that thefe ladies cannot help making a fellow of your friend’s turn, of Sue T flatteiing confequence to them ?
The ’widow, MiSs Turner, and Lady Sarah, are already within an ace'of pulling caps upon my account. — Obliging creatures! — yet, notwithstanding the glow of gratitude that warms my heart, I would neither,dye for, nor live with, the one or the other of you.
Lady Sarah, indeed, has charms that are almost irreSistible. — Forty thouSand pounds, my boy, is an important Sum ; but if her perSon was as lovely as it is in reality diSgusting, her mind would prove a Sufficient antidote against every favourable imprestion.
What pity is it, that instead of adorning an unamiable outSide, which, by the bye, is only lighting up its defecis, that theSe ladies, whoSe Sole pleafure is conquest. So totally diSregard the culture of their understandings and improvement of their tempers! — Good-nature can Soften even the mest rugged Sett of features; and what heart may not be won by intelledlual accomplishments ?
Mifs Kennington is So perfedHy unassuming, and So aftlefsly engaging, that she would,obtain . in one instant, thv>ugh her figure w'as ae little • eligible as her coafin’s, what the labour of yeaTs '
could
24is The HISTORY or
could never procure her: — I mean admiration.
Had the huffy been ever So well instructed reS-peCting the nicety and caprice of male hearts, she could not more judicioufly conduCt herfelf; for, by difclaiming all pretenstons to power, she becomes irreSistible.
The elegance of her Sentiments, the beautiful propriety of her manners, the foftnefs, the gen-tfenefs of her difpoSition, the foundnefs, the delicacy of Jier judgment, in preferring the worthy Bob to bis rattling Saucy friend, are charms that could not fail to pleafe, though her eyes were deprived of their lustre, her cheek of its bloom, and her whole countenance of its various striking graces. — Yes, Harry, I constder the preference of your brother to me as the touch-stone of her
merit. — Minds feek like minds: — and is there
*}
a chara«Ster upon earth more unexceptionable than Bob’s ? — The woman that betrays an approbation of him, does honour to her own fenst-bility ; for a light, a fantastical, ah uninformed, or in any wife unworthy bofom must be incapable of receiving a due impreffion of his value. —■
In a word, Mifs Kennington is the very being a man would chufe to unite himfelf to for life, by promising him permanent felicity: but where the wish extends not beyond the pasting off an idle hour, your Lady Sarahs and your Widows an-fwer the purpofe more effeClually; their Spirit and finesse finding you employment, at the fame time -that their folly and vanity excite your mirth.
Mr. Finly too much refembles your brother in taste and Sentiment to be unmindful of Mifs Kennington’s worth. — He is, indeed, evidently attached by it, and Bob is as evidently alarmed ; his countenance is too honest not to bear testimony to the feelings of his heart.
My .
Miss SOMMERVILE. £5
My Lord, who values himSelf not a little upon his difce'^Tment, drew me aSide this morning, and with the dtmost exultation cried, “ That jade ‘‘ has done the bussnefs; it is just as I could wifh;
Mr. Finly is the most deSirable of alliances.—« ‘‘ I little-fufpedted her capable of fuch a con-> quest, continued he; but youth is a powerful charm, and innocence strangely affedts us. — Had she been more degagee, more vivacious, as I long laboured to render her, she had been difregarded by the very man on earth who best merits her esteem. — Slappy incorrigibill-‘‘ ty ! I will hence-forth leave nature to its own « operations: — nothing can equal it.”
Unfortunately, Bob over-heard every Syllable. — He retired in confuSion, — most Significantly entreating me, by his eyes, to follow him : I guef-Icd the buSmefs, and prepared myfelf accordingly.
But how unequal my -preparation to the encounter ! — The anguish, the distrefs of his countenance is not to be deferibed.
I am astonished, faid I, to find you in this pitiable condition : what can occafion —”
“ Frank, Frank, (replied he, with great ear-nestnefs) forbear to trifle with me; my admi-ration of Mifs Kennington cannot have efcaped “ you: So accomplished, irresistibly accomplish-‘‘ ed, how natural my condudt ! But Mr. Finly “ has the advantage of me in every reSpedt, and vvill rob me of the most valuable of acquifiti-ons, an amiable, gentle, and Sweetly informed heart.”
I would have perfuaded him his apprehenfions were groundless ; but he interrupted me :	Do
not attempt to impoSe upon me (cried he); their good liking is reciprocal ; an unuSual V OL. I.	C	constraint
26 The HISTORY of
constraint has been viSible in her behaviour “ towards me ever Since his arrival; and as for “ his part, he has neither eyes nor ears for any
other objedl.---1 feel myfelf (continued he,
** in accents that reached my heart) cut down ; “ I acknowledge his fuperiority. He Is in every refpeQ:, as hisLordssiip too justly obferved, an
eligible alliance.---Yet am I not most
Singularly unhappy, to lofe, in one and the fame instant, the man and woman 1 hold most -dear ? —Strange fatality ! and have we met ** only for this ?’’
Dear fellow, -(Said I) recollefl yourfelf; you know Mr. Finly’s difpoSition : he must be in-capable of wounding his friend’s peace.”
“ How happily ignorant you are (returned he) “ in affairs of this* nature.—If love is an enlar-“ ger of the-heart in Some refpedls, it must na-turally operate very differently, when .relin-“ quishing the beloved objedt becomes the quef-tion.~ There the voice of friendship is heard but faintly ; nay too frequently the pleadings even of honour and humanity are totally dif-“ regarded.”
It were endlefs to recite all that .pasted.--
I endeavoured, to the utmost of my power, to
brighten him up ;-----but was fo little Satisfied
with my fuccefs, and conceived fo mean an opinion of your whiners, that I abjure every Soft connection, and will remain no lefs unchanged in my condition than Sentiments.
I am, my dear Slarry, your affeCtionate
t
• Bradshaw.
L E T-
Mfss S O M M E R V I L E. 27
"^X'^ X'^X••6X"^X&‘
LETTER VI.
Mils Kennington to MiSs Carey.
DID 1 not fay I would fiirow aSide my pen till my Spirits were fomewhat revived ? Idle, thoughtlefs promife ! ill befitting my present Situation.
Yet I had, indeed, begun to flatter mySelS, with what degree of probability must be obvioiuj, that at least my continuance at this place would have proved an agreeable period; she lively com-plaifance of Mr. Bradfliaw, in conjunDion with my Lord’s affefled gaiety, fo far amufing Lady Sarah, as to leave her no leifure to interrupt the more rational fatisfa^lions of Mr. Shugburghy Mr. Fleetwood, and your friend.
But our calm delights, however Seemingly Secure, were Suddenly torn from us by the arrival of two ladies by no means strangers to my fine relations, and a gentleman known to them only by fame.
Elated at the rencounter, and with hearts replete with giddy vivacity, the former Soon united themfelvesto the laughing party ; whilst the latter from an early contradled friendship and fi-milarity of taste with Mr. Fleetwood, made a more Sober, though for me unfortunate elefHon.
You may, perhaps, think it extraordinary, that the additional company of a man, whofe figure, addrefs, rank, and Sentiments, intitle him to the most favourable, the most reipe£l-ful, consideration, should be deemed a calamity
C 2	——htl
28	The HISTORY of
-.—but here lies the grievance.—Lord Kenning-ton, who Seldom Sees things in their proper light, has been So fatally abfurd as to mifconstrue Mr. Finly’s affedlion for his friend, into a growing approbation of me; and with more zeal than propriety or kindneSs, read me an inftrudiive lecture upon the occasson.
A
No Sooner had a day or two So far farhiliarized us, that Mr. Finly began to treat me with eafe and freedom, than his Lordship conceived this notable idea ; and frequently incited me by nods and winks, at that time unintelligible, to affume a greater degree of Sprightlinefs, or, to uSe his own language, animation.
But in proportion as Mr. Finly’s gaiety broke forth, Mr. Fleetvyood’s declined.
I was too much prepossessed in his favour to be unmindful of the -ohange^ but how impossible for me to Seek an explanation in which 1 had reaSon to believe myfelf particularly concerned, Your own delicacy will Sufficiently fuggess.
Agitated and perplexed, 1 knew not how to Support my Lord’s too penetrating and curioussy observing eye ; judge then of my confusson and apprehensson, when I this morniBg received a command to attend him in his own apartment.
A criminal—I nevertheless appeared beSore him.
“ I confeSs,'Sarah (Said he, in his peculiar manner), you are an astonishing girl.—The innocence, the undeSigning turn of your fea-tures, throws one to that degree off one’s “ guard, that the arrow is lodged before the ar~ ** cher is perceived.”
“ My Lord !”---(Said the Simpleton.)
Prettily
Miss SOMMERVILE. 29
‘‘ Prettily affected !” exclaimed he.-—That “ is, indeed, a master-stroke!—And To, child, “ you would perSuade me, your hemt is uncon-‘‘ fcious of the mifchief your eyes have effected : “ but renounce your fex for once, and honestly tell me, if you are not fenSible that Mr. Finly *• is become your very great admirer ?’*
Indeed, my Lord”—
“ Well, well,— (cried he, interrupting me) “ I am not a friend to protestations, and have “ no right to confeSs you ;— therefore, my lit-“ tie coustn, I will Spare your blushes, and only ** inform you huw happy the difcovery stis ren-“ dered me.—Mr. Finly has a noble fortune, “ has travelled with every advantage, and can-. ** not fail of fuccefs whercfoever he vouchfafes to pay his addresses.— Be. it your care then, as “ the first defhanded proof of your grateful at-tachment to me, to improve his good liking. Your face has every charm but vivacity to re-commend it, and with that addition must fix him irrevocably.—What Speechlefs 1—moti-onlefs! (demanded he) — Mr. Finly’s fate is, in one refpedl. Similar with Pygmalion’s ; he, ‘‘ indeed, was captivated with a work of his ‘‘ own handsbut a statue is not lefs a statue (laughing .immoderately) for not being his per-formance :—and I as vainly endeavour to “ warm you into refentiment by my raillery, as he wished to communicate life to the beau-teous marble.—However, (continued he, aS-“ fuming a lefs whimSical accent) if you only ‘‘ possefs Such a degree of fenfibility as to make a proper ufe of the intimations I have thrown “ out, I shall be content.—An affair of this “ nature once begun is more than half accom-.
C 3	plished
30 The H I S T O R Y or
‘‘ plished—and your abilities mav be relied'on.
So faying, he hurried by me, with a mixture of compassion, contempt and approbation, in his countenance.
Lady Sarah’s woman bounced in upon me, before I had recovered my Surprize and mortification.---“ Upon my word, mifs, (laid she
Icmewbat pertly) his Lordship treats you with ** uncommon tendernefs I ever-heard the conclufion of your converlation, and have rea-fon to know, that if my lady had been un-der the fame circumstances he would not fo
readily have excufed her fifence.--But Some
folks may fooiier steal a horfe, than others “ look over the hedge.”
I apprehended an uncivil stroke, and was glad to find it no worfe ; but lest her flippancy should provoke me to commit high treafon against her lady mistrefs, as offending her would be most infallibly deemed, I left her abruptly, and rejoined the company.
Should his Lordship’s conjeflures have any real foundation, adieu to every profpe61, every shadow of felicity. Yet, Surely, Mr. Finlycan never be guilty of fo great an error, as to conceive fo uninformed a creature as me could prove
a Suitable companion for him.--This fantastical
nobleman must be premature in his judgment. Had he entertained an opinion of the fame nature refpefling his friend,, the amiable Fleetwood, I should not have been difpofed to call his penetration in question.—But to what purpofe his approbation ?—Pity, oh kindly pity, a misjudging dependent being!----Now am I more than
ever convinced of the cruelty of depriving me of the fandion and protection of a tender mother.
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 31
ther, at a period So critical.—Yet of whom can I complain ? Dare I depend more on a temporal than an eternal parent?-—When the mind is Softened, how affliction pours in from every a-venue I My father’s death, my mother’s difa-greeable fituation, my own precarious dependence, were all twisted about my heart, by the ITngle pang it experienced on Mr. Fleetwood’s account,.
I will, however henceforth fortify myfelf a-gainst fuch idle weaknefs.
But tell me, ray dear, for T must be Serious, why is giddy vanity alone incapable of delighting ray imagination ? The ladies at this place Set me, a very pretty example.;. Coquetting and reparteeing fills up all their time, nor have I heard one Sentimental fubjeCI difcuffed by the whole party.—May they still purfue their unfa-tisfaCIory pleafures, whilst I divide all my hours between my distant and prefent friends.
. Pay proper duty for. me to my mother ; but there are many particulars in this letter highly improper for her perufal.'
l am, my Dear,
Most affeClionately your’s,
S, Kennington.
%
r
C'4v	' LE.D-
/
33	The HISTORY OF
cooo 4* COdO 4 0000 4 oooo 4 0000 4 cooo cooo 4 0000 4 cL,4it 4 0000
LETTER VII.
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
Holyhead.
WHAT horrible confequenccs this fame passion of love is capable of producing ? Instead of that amiable industry, that worthy e-mulation, that fo late prevailed of excelling each other in a£ts of kindnefs only, w’e are become liient. Serious, and referved.
Bob gives himfelf for indifpoSed.— Mr. Fin-
ly is declaredly affedled on his account.-Mifs
Kennington’s eyes tell Soft Sympathizing tales.— The fluttering ladies are out of tune : they ceafe to exist, if unssattered or unnoticed ; and, upon my honour, I am fo far unhinged by my appre-henstons for your brother, that I cannot feed their vanity as I was wont.
O cruel winds, when will ye relent!—My Lord and I had a kind of unfriendly brush this morning.—‘‘ Mr. Fleetwood’s indifpoSition (Said he, having given me the time of the day) is a « most unlucky circumstance.—What a change ** has it not already introduced!—The broad contagious mirth that ufed to revel in every “ countenance, is totally fled. I myfelf have ** born up furprifingly hitherto : but I am mor-tal, (added he, with his peculiar twist of his hand) and if once Subdued shall not Suddenly
revive.-"-
Miss 6 \J M M ii K V 1 L xl,
« revive.—Your Hum-drums is a most obsti-“ nate dlforder.”
I own I was piqued at his manner of attacking me, and replied in accents Sufficiently intelligent;
—----“ I acknowledge the justice of your Lord-
** ship’s obfervation, and it shall not be my “ fault if my friend does not abfent himfelf un-“ til he recovers a capacity for joy.—It is unpar-donable to infe£l: fuch good company.”
Mr. Shugburgh perceiving, by the peer’s flushed cheek, that we wereTather at crofs-pur-
pofes, very opportunely interpofed...........
« What Silly trick are-you two playing?” (demanded he humorousty).—Empty stomachs “ are apt to engender steward inclinations.—-To breakfast, to breakfast; if you are wife.-— Would you aggravate what is in itfelf a real ' “ misfortune ?—A perverfe will (no bad obferva- -** tion for a Sailor) cannot, nay, -indeed, ought
“ not, at all times to be tolerated.-But would '
“ you quarrel with difeafe, a calamity to which ^ we are all liable?—I hope better things “ {added he); for he must have a strange nature that could indulge in levity when a fellow-creature, much more a fellow-traveller, is in-“ capable of participating, . This young gen-“ tieman’s disorder (Said he as a farther proof of his fagacity) may not continue, or wemay have but a few hours to continue, with him; let “ us not, therefore, idly-forfeit a fortnight’s a-' mity which has yielded us Such abundant de-light, unknowing as we are what the^enfuing ; “ fortnight may produce.”
His Lordship was pleafed to receive this Speech very graciousty.—“ Well Said', old Sledfast (cri-** ed he.)r---My young Spark here was inclined
C 5	“ to-'
34 The HISTORY of
“ to be choleric, from my being unfeafonably “ pettish ; but you have fet us right, and we “ will never err again.—Your hand ? (continued he)—-May the accommodation be lasting !— “ No apologies (I offered a flight excufe for my warmth). We were equally to blame. Let us, therefore, efface remembrances of the “ past by future benevolence.”
I bowed, in token of acquiefcence, and was flipping up stairs, in order to divert Bob with the fcene, when my attention was engaged by a very different Species of altercation that issued from an apartment, the door of which was half open.
I must tell you, (Said Mrs. Barnard our landlady, for her voice is pretty remarkable) that your behaviour is thought very particu-“ lar by all the ladies in the houfe.—As if you could not as well be Sociable, and dine where other folks dine.—For my part, I love to pick and chufe my company as well as the best ; but when I know who’s who, I am no flin-cher.”
I am forry my referve (refumed a Softer and more Judicious accent) gives offence to any “ one.—But f have my reaft ns-and cannot apprehend it n^ceffary to do violence to my inclination to gratify the curiossty of perSons I am intirely in acquainted with. If you re-quire any farther amends for extraordinary at-tendance,I will gladly Satisfy you. I would not be “ troubleSome to you, hut on your own terms.” Nay, for that matter, I do not Scruple your pay ((aid ray landlady) ; but you are ycung, and may want your money hereafter. Store ** is no fore, and a penny Saved is a penny got.—-
“ To
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 55
« To be fure, it does look mysterious to shut' “'■'yourfelf up, and only fets people watching and “ -prying; and I know not what construdlions “ are already put upon it. Beauty and rags, as the faying is, are always caught at; and lord Ken-nington’s valet de chambre Swears he will find"' you out, let what will be the confequence.”
“ Surely (refumed the Sweetly articulated found) I am very unhappy ; but let me hear . no more of it: I will hot be infulted by any one ; and whatever infolence the man may be capable .of performing, I doubt not but his . “ Lord will have thejustSce to punish; I shall therefore make myfelf very eafy.”
My landlady flapped the door after her iu a kind of pet, and w^ent away muttering.
How natural .it is to be impertinently curious i nor is any rank or condition, elegant breeding or Sentiment, a Security against this little passion. It is true, it operates differently upon different minds, but still retains one and the. fame principle ; nor does ray Lord’s valet experience a stronger defire to difcover this stranger, than 1 her voice,, expressions, and Singularity of con- -dudlj have excited in my breast.’	,
I have made all possible, though' distant* en^: quiry concerning her, and find she arrived only a ; few days before 'us.-r-She . has remained invifible ever Since, except at one unlucky period, that , the distressful condition of a poor Sailor, who wag Seized witsta fainting-fiSunder hCr window; . drew her from her concealment, in the full face . of all the Second-hand gentry. '
Humanity alone engroffed her attention • till-she Saw the fellow revive, when recollediing her own Situation, ■ and. perceiving herfel-f. obferved
with
I
36 The H I S T O R Y of
with wonder and inquifitivenefs, she retired in conSuSion.
It was in conSequence of this accidental exposure of her perfon, that Mrs. Barnard was employing her rhetoric, in order to gratify her guefts with an opportunity of converSing with her,— who were beyond meafure felicitous to detedl the Minx, as they civilly stiled her.
But she was proof against her eloquence, and by difappointing the wishes, increafed the enmity of the whole party.
What a strange unfatisfadlory life she must have led !- -Handfome and well-bred my landlady defcribes her, but accufes her of obstinacy. Her reafons for burying herfelf in retirement are undoubtedly of an extraordinary nature, or she could never have had the refolution to deny her-Self for So long a period, what is fo highly essential to the happinefs of her fex in general I mean adulation.
Perhaps she is unfortunate ; perhaps necessitous : if fo, I indeed pity her.---An enlarged
mind and contracted circumstances is a calamity, especially when in conjundtion with a form that places both the one and the other in a dangerous point of view; for there are a fet of wretches upon, earth, dignified with titles and curled with riches, capable of marking down fuch a defence-lefs innocent as lawful prey: and innocent i ought to deem her, who has betrayed no tokens of vice, in either her expressions or behaviour, and only from a Singularity, in itfelf far from discommendable,avoids meeting impertinent eyes. For rny own part, I v/iji not, to gratify any little palFion, however greatly tempted, tranfgrefs
the
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 57
the rules of good-breeding; nor shall her peace or privacy be broken in upon by
Frank Bradshaw.
----------------o— --------------¥5
LETTER VIII.
The Same to the Same.
Holyhead,
Wind high and unfanjourahle,
This morning has, indeed, been a buSy one. We were stated at breakfast, according to custom, neither abfolutely Sprightly nor absolutely dull, when.our ears were Saluted by an unufual clamour.
You miSchief-making thing, you! (cried a Semale voice) and So, if it was in your p8\¥er, “ you-would ruin Mr. Squib in his Lord’s good opinion, only for an innocent frolic, wou’d you ?”
“ Aye, that she would (rejoined another lady) it is plain, by pushing for the parlor : but << one comfort is, that his Lordship is above li-stening to Such trumpery as she is.”
Mrs. Barnard (my heart acknowledged the voice,) I inSist upon Speaking with the compa-ny in that room. That they were perSons of distinction, I have already learnt, and doubt not but they will condeScend to proteCf an unof-fending creature fromhifolent interruption.— I disdain expostulating with any of you, though
I have
38 The H I S T O R Y of
“ 1 have not deferved the treatment I have met “ with. — Yet, perhaps, the fault is in myfelf, ** — You might have no view beyond diverting ‘‘ yourfelves, and I may teel too fenSibly for the occaSion; but furely you ought not to have “ done.it at my expence.— I again repeat, that it is in vain to oppofe my refolution ; for I will not retire, until I have Seen the nobleman that daring fellow belongs to.
Surprized at what we heard, we gazed upon one another. •—Mr; Shugburgh,. to whom the voice of distrefs was familiar, and whofe humanity never flept, instantly opened the door, and prefented .us. with a .fcene beyond defcription interesting.
SiippoSe a lamb’ about to be vvorr’ed by half a dozen hungry wolves. ■— Suppofe ■— but it is impossible for youito conceive any one idea fo tenderly striking, or fo beautifully affedting, as the lovely stranger appeared, furrounded by a Set of beings bursting with, envy, malice, and malevolence.
The passage, was instantly cleared. — The generous-hearted Sailor, with a franknefs peculiar to himfelf, advanced to the young v/oman, and taking her by the hand. — “ I know not (Said he) that perfon- living I would not gladly “ refcue from the gripe of barbarity; -— but you, “ my pretty creature, to deliver fuch a one as “ you from perfecution must unfpeakably de-“ light a benevolent heart. I have obtained a “ kind of right in you by the .little Service I have “ rendered you, on the strength of which, and “ the influence I apprehend I poSTefs with' this good company, I will introduce you to them, “ and them to you. — My Lord.” —
“ Pardon
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 39
Pardon me. Sir, (faid the stranger, gently difengaging her hand) I cannot, I will not fuf-pe£t you capable of fporting with the un-happy ; — but as I am confci.ous your intended “ compliment is utterly unfuitable to the humi-iity of my fortune, you must permit me, by ** first declining it, to fave myfelf from the ri-“ dicurte I should otherwife incur. I have been “ grofly affronted by Lord Kennington’s valet, who assuming the drels of one of the chamber-“ maids, entered my apartment, and behaved “ very improperly. I own I could not overlook “ fo notorious an outrage, and was determined “ to apply for protedlion to a quarter where I “ could not apprehend a denial. —If I have fuc-ceeded in that refpeSf, my every wish is ac-“ complished, and I have only to intreat, that ‘‘ my intrufion, with the caufe of it, may be to-“ tally forgotten.’’
Tell us not of forgetting (faid Mr. Finiy, ** pushing forward); it is impossible to forget fo agreeable an objedf. Ladies, Mifs Kenning-“ ton, perhaps you may prevail; — we are all travellers alike ; — I can perceive no didlindfi-« on : — you shall, you must become one of us, at least during our temporary limitation to. ‘‘ this untoward fpot.”
Mifs Kennington warmly joined her fweetly perfuafive accents. Never did she appear more amiable in my fight; the friend of her own fex, the friend of lovelinefs, no narrow apprehenfions did she entertain of being out-shone. — Yes, for her fake, Harry, I will believe a woman can be generous. As for the others, except the Simpering Mrs. Bateman, who is not utterly devoid of humanity, tdl it not in Gath, publijh it not in the
courts
/
40 The HISTORY of
courts of AJkalon. — ^Tis true they Spoke not; but verbal oppoSition is unncceffary when the brow is unfavourable: —the fiend was in their countenances. Thefe haughty puppets ssiall ne-verthelefs dance to my wires, and Sufficiently abfurd T will render them. — Oh I could rave ! — But Mifs Kennington is capable of reconciling me to what I Should otherwife abjure; nor-will I dare to traduce a Set of petticoats, whilst Ihe condefcends to wear them.
There is a dignity in this stranger’s deportment, yet an humble uniformity, different from any thing I ever yet met with. To all. the beauty of Mifs Kennington’s perfon and character, is fuperadded an animation both of features and manners; a commanding fbmething which the pencil might, perhaps reach, but the pen never can. The goodnefs of the one appears paf-five, the other a£five. Her foul beams in her-eyes; nor is she in the least constrained or uncoN jebled by the fuperiority, as she would intimate,;, of her company. — But let her circumstances be-ever fo unhappy, it is evident she is enobled by nature. Their honours are merely hereditary.
Her drefs is, to the last degree, plain, but~ perfedlly elegant; — an unquestionable testimony of an elegant mind. Though Solicitous to conceal herfelf from every eye, she could not degenerate into negligence; the purity of her heart, or excellent established custom of her life inclining her to preferve her outward appearance as free from every loofe impropriety, as her interior part.
You and I, Harry, know Something of the Sex, and need not be told v/hat different creatures the morning and evening prefents them;
but
Miss SOMMER VILE. 41
but the man, however captivated by a pretty figure when difplayed to the best advantage, would be instantly restored to liberty on discovering the cheat; for few of us can excuSe a dirty propenfity in even a first-rate beauty : nor is it Surprising that the Spruce neat chambermaid engages attention, where the lady-mistreSs is an arrant stattern.
Morn.
We got over yesterday pretty hobblingly; but I perceived Lady Sarah’s breast was this morning high-fwelled with right honourable indignation.
She had reflected upon the strange condudl she had been furpriled into reSpedting the little adventurer, and could not Sufficiently defpiSe herfelf for it. A pert thing, come from nobody knew “ where, bred nobody knew how, and, perhaps, “ born on a dunghill, must take it into her head “ to conceive herfelf affronted by a little harm-“ lefs frolic concerted by a Set of people eve-“ ry way her equals, and have the effrontery “ to prefs upon perfons of fashion ; — who, “ struck by the fingularity of her confidence, and the plaufibility of a few common-place “ expressions, — immediately open their arms ** and receive her amongst them.”
“ Hey-dey! here’s a turn indeed I (cried Mr. “ Shugburgh) — Ladies hearts, I find, are much ‘‘ fooner lost than won.”
“ I beg, fir, (refumed her Ladyship, not a ** little heated) you will not treat what I fay So “ ludicroussy; the impropriety of our proceed-ings is Such, thar even our very Servants are “ tempted to exclaim against them; and my ‘‘ woman, as she justly obferves, from being no-
“ torious
42 The HISTORY of
“ torious for her honesty, might more naturally “ expe<st to be placed at table with us, than a “ stranger who can have no pretenSions to Such toleration.”
“ But Lady Sarah, (faid Mr. Finly, warmly) “ you will not. Surely, take upon you to Say, that this lovely girl is not of a very different fpe-“ cies to your handmaid. — Is she not mistreSs “ of many acccomplishments beyond the reach of fortune or the dignity of title ? — Her ad-
** drefs, her language, her Sentiments, are---”
« Very fine, (cried she, breaking in upon him “ abruptly) very fine, upon my honour, fir ; but. “ not fufficiently So as to excufe our abfurdity. ‘‘ For my part, I have recovered the uSe of my ** Senfes, and shall aQ; agreeably to their die-** tates.”
Arraigning a lady’s judgment is not the method to win her to our purpoSe; I therefore pursued a very different plan. — “I confefs (faid I, “ cohering much meaning and fubmiffion into my countenance) that there is too just grounds “ for Lady Sarah’s diffatisfaftion : we were ra-“ ther premature in our approbation of this girl.
—gyj jgf i^gj. enjoy the favour we have shewn-** her, fo long as she retains her grateful, her humble behaviour ;—-it would be cruel to pu-** rush her for our folly: your Ladyship knows (bowing vvith great refpedt), she was fuffici-** ently fenfible that the honour was-too much
“ for her, and most reiti6fantly accepted it.'-
Mrs. Bateman, Mifs Turner, (they but now’ joined us) how fay you ?—Are you difpofed to efpou'e the cauSe of good-nature and amiable condefeenfion ? Lady Sarah (added I most ar-
« tificially^
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 43
<< tificially, for I had not given her time to Speak “ her farther fentiments) is already overcome, ‘‘ and you must likewife yield.”
“ Thou odd creature ! (Simpered out Mrs. “ Bateman) give us the merits — though do not upon recolledfion, we may implicitly Sub-“ fcribe where Lady Sarah approves.”
I difcharged a whole volley of compliments, extolled the goodnefs, the gracioufnefs, of a difpofition only a few removes from infernal.— It however was an honest deceit, and happily preferved Patty Price from falling a prey to the united malice of a parcel of proud, artful, dependants, with whom her fuperiority was a crime of the deepest dye.
What dupes thefe fine ladies are even to the most contemptible race of flatterers, their attendants ! Humiliating refleftion!
Thefe gentry can wind them up, and let them down at will by no better artifice than a judicir ous regard to time and their most prevailing inclination ; and it was a moot point whether Mrs. Abigail or your friend had been vi6lorious. So dexterousty had she played her cards, and worked upon her Ladyship’s various, unamiable paf-Sions.
Mifs Kennington having past a fleeplefs night from the tooth-ach, breakfasted in her own a-partment; nor would Patty Price (our new companion’s name) permit her to breakfast alone. Their tete-a-tete^ I doubt not, was an agreeable one, as they are apparently well-aste6led towards each other, and postefs fources of delight peculiar to their characters.
Bob and Mr. Finly would have been lost things without them, had not Lady Sarah’s extraordinary
44 The HISTORY or
nary behaviour rendered their abSence a most de-Sirable circumstance.—They could not, however,-forbear drawing off in the evening, whilst I was-. left to perform the fatiguing talk of flattery, a-lone and unaffisted.—But it must be performed, or Patty be a Sufferer ; — I therefore chearfully Submitted to the otherwife cruel constraint,3 except now and then that a recolledtion would strike me of their happineSs, when I found my-
felf pained and unhinged,-not from etivy^
Harry,---but from love; — for were they not
all my chofen friends ?-
Adieu.
LETTER IX.
.. Mifs Kennington to MiSs Carey,
Holyhead.
Rejoice with me, mydearDolly, that things have once more taken a happy turn; nor will I deprive my Self of prefent pleafure (a favourite tenet of Mr. Bradfhaw’s), by fooliflily anticipating future ill; nor will I borrow a tenet only from that gentleman, but on this occasion take the liberty to adopt his language, and profefs that I am tempted to conceive myfeif cast on fairy ground. So unexpedled, fo flattering, is the alteration thefe last four-and-twenty hours have produced in my affairs.—And yet, to deal fairly by you, I have only exchanged menial for
corporeal
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 45
corporeal fuffering.—A tooth, a fingle tooth most cruelly torments me, and obliges me to con-fefs, in fpite of my heroics, that pain is a real, an almost infupportable, evil.
I would inform you of the strange caufe from whence theSe wonderful effedls have been produced, but know not where to begin. •— A kind of magic,--a strange plot,— in short, I am convinced that the distin<9;ion Mr. Finly was pleafed to pay me, was wholly owing to my being the least fluttering, consequently, the most rational, female of the companyfor no Sooner did he encounter the lovely. Spirited, glowing countenance of Patty Price, than your little friend dwindled into that pretty nothingneSs of ilgnificance peculiar to her age and inoffenstve nature.
But, methinks, I hear you alk, who Patty Price may be. —-You must, indeed, be content with the most limited intelligence.—No one can ;give other account of her, than that she is a beautiful and reServed young woman ; nor is she to be prevailed upon to give an account of her-Self.
I am foir y to Say it, but my Lord’s Servants in general are a confident Set of wretches; nor do I apprehend Mrs. Bateman’s woman, or Mr. Fin-ly’s gentleman (as he is called), to be one jot better diSpoSed. They, as well as th ir masters and mistresses, languished for amuSement.——Cards, Scandal, by a too frequent recourSe, lost the power to pleaSe.—A frolic was what they had Set their hearts upon ;—and it was that frolic that procured us the happineSs we now enjoy.
Plow effectually was the malicious purpoSe of thele high-fed beingsdeSeated!—Instead of humbling
"	4^ The HISTORY or
bling a stranger, whoSe love of retirement, evident fuperiority, and perhaps due contempt of them excited their refentment, they have abundantly exalted her : therefore, in constderation of the fervice they have rendered her, I will overlook the bafenefs of their intention.
Mr. Shugburgh warmly efpoufes her interest; —but it is a fufficient recommendation with him, to be unfortunate or unprote6ied. My Lord and Mr. Bradshaw were evidently struck by her appearance, but Mr. Finly was abfolutely transported.
The ladies, indeed, behold her with cold civility.—A Sneer viSibly adorned Lady Sarah’s aipe6t; but, however becoming she might conceive it to her features, it was far from conveying an amiable idea of her humanity.
You fee ^low pert a Smiling profpeSl, and a chearful companion or two, is capable of making me. I v/ould not be ungrateful, I would not be Severe, but it hurts me unSpeakably, to perceive the //Y:/^-mindedneSs of this great relation. Unprovoked to become the enemy, in all probability, of virtue; virtue in its utmost lovelineSs, shunning the Sight, the approbation of mortality ; is Surely a refle6bon on either her head or her heart.—I wish both may not be greatly concerned.
I have pushed pretty hard to engage her to communicate, but without SucceSs.
My dear madam, (Said she this morning, in a teU-ar-tetefi I am convinced your anxiety ref-“ pefiing me proceeds from real benevolence; “ —but I cannot prevail upon mySelf to diS-cloSe what would pain me to relate, and you “ to hear, without the least benefit or advan-;	“ tagc
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 47
tage to either of us. Be Satisfied, (continued
she w'lth a Sigh, which she vainly endeavoured “ to fupprefs) my referve does not refult from " guilt; — that Fm unfortunate, not criminal; “ and should my affairs ever take a favourable “ turn, I will most gladly account for what at << prefent may have the appearance of mystery, “ as I find your good opinion will always be of “ confequence to my happinefs.”
Lady Sarah has been shut up Some hours with her beloved confidants; who, I fuppofe, will leave nothing unfaid to prevail upon her to discountenance the objedt of her refentment.
Her Ladyship’s paffions are strong; but her interest, I hope, will not be Sufficient to biafs the whole company.—As for me, I am a mere cypher, nor would my voice be attended to by this coufin on any occafion. I am impatient for the event, as I cannot doubt Mrs. Preston’s power or inclination to prejudice her Ladyship against this worthy girl.
* * *
My conjedlures were but too well founded.— There has been a terrible turmoil; — but Patty is Safe.—Mr. Bradshaw, I shall ever love him for his well employed .eloquence, pleaded her caule with Lady Sarah. She was overcome, and I am happy.
We pasted the whole day together.—I wished but for one addition to the fatisiadiion we enjoyed ;—nor did 1 absolutely wish in vain. Our .tea had, indeed, been brought us, every attendant difiriiffed, (it is eaie and freedom alone that constitutes felicity) before the glad period arrived ;—
when
48 The H I S T O R Y of
when a gentle tap at the door of my apartment demanded our attention.
I flew with a kind of Spontaneous impatience to inform myfelt of the caufe. It was Mr. Fleetwood ; the friendly, the obliging, Mr. Fleetwood, my dear, whole interest in the wellbeing of your humble Servant had incited to steal from the joyous party below, to make a few tender enquiries concerning her.
Ill-timed, yet unconquerable timidity. —No impropriety, no extraordinary distinffion from a man of politenefs and fenSibility; neverthelefs the blushing cheek officiouily betrayed the fluttering heart.
My companion, whofe vivacity and well cultivated understanding most defervedly give her the advantage, relieved my confuston, by claiming a share in the compliment.
“ I find, fir, (faid (lie) that nothing is fo at-tradfing to young minds, as youth. Had ei-ther patient or nurfe attained their grand cli-mafferic, a civil distant enquiry would have been the utmost attention a gentleman of your ** time of life would Fave willingly paid ; but, as the cafe now stands, you have very prettily “ contrived to introduce yourfelf.—Yet, why “ (added she, looking archly) attempt to impofe “ upon us ? It is true, the deception is decently covered; but if you had not promifed your-Self Some farther iatisfadfion than a mere How “ do you ? you had not deferred it till this pe-“ riod;—this tea-drinking period, when it is fo “ natural to expe6f, and fo common to give an invitation to take a dish, and a confequential “ share in the converfation.”
“ I own,
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 49
“ I own, madam, (faid he, Smiling agreeably) the marks are strong upon me.—But Say, am I then SucceSsSul ?—Will you admit me to the << participation I Sought for; or can you reSoive to punisti my preSumption and hypocriSy, by obliging me to return Srom whence I came «‘T will be very plain with you, str, (return-ed she, in the Same humorous manner); I am “ no misanthrope,—thereSore could not infli6t: «« the punishment you mention, but by doing violence to' ray own inclination ; — and (she looked So meaningly at me, I could Scarce Support my own conSciouSneSs) we will not for ‘‘ once behave ungraciousty. But methinks you would have been doubly welcome, if you had brought us another stroller, as we could then have had a party of our own.”
“ O! madam, (Said he, with agreeable Sur-priSe) if that is all, your condefcenston shall be “ amply rewarded, for I have a friend who will be equally delighted with mySelf at So unex-peSed an overture ;—nor must I be prevailed ‘‘ upon to delay his happineSs.” — So Saying he hastily withdrew, notwithstanding MiSs Patty ad-viSed him to rest content until the tea was over.
I protest, madam, (Said she, as Soon as we were alone,) I was quite concerned for you.— “ That young gentleman—But he is perSeSlly agreeable, and you are not infenstble.Do not be offended (added she, very prettily) at “ this little liberty, which I would never have ‘‘ taken, but in order to account for a behaviour So foreign to the prefent diSpofition of my “ heart. I, indeed, felt So much for you, that I “ forgot my Self; and, by an affumed vivacity, ‘‘ not only relieved you at that exigence,, but VoL. I.	D	“ have
50 The HISTORY of
have procured you an agreeable evening,
I had no time to reply,—the gentlemen, wi( pleaSure-fpeaking countenances, made their ai pearance, and the conversation became gener£ We were abundantly too well pleafed with eac other to fecolleft the purpofefor which we wei assembled ;—‘and is it not astonishing, Dolly, th; cards are So frequently permitted to interrupt ir telledlual enjoyments ?
All my former Sufferings were forgotten ; an never, never did I experience more heart-fe Satisfa6lion.
T am, &c.
LETT E R IX.
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. "Fleetwood.
Holyhead.
A Week, my good Harry, has now elapSe without any extraordinary change, ex cept Bob’s happy deliverance from every appre hensson of rivalship.—The fair stranger has ii a fatisfaSory degree drawn off Finly’s attentior from Mifs Kennington, and your brother’s hearl beats high with love andffriendship.
Lord Kennington is hnnfelf too much delighted with Patty to be fenSible of Mr. Finly’s preference of her to '^his niece.—A happy circumstance for us all, as difcord and confufion could alone be the confequence of Such a difcovery.
dk
Miss S O M MERVILE.
He flutters round her chair, whifpers the Softest prettiest things, exults in his own importance, and is utterly unfufpicious that it extends not beyond his little heart.	^
Mr. Shugburgh’s open generous nature knows not to difguife its feelings.—What he warmly approves he must warmly commend ; by which practice I have been enabled to trace the envious workings of certain ladies difpoSitions, un-perceived by every eye but mine.
Lady Sarah and Mifs Turner are every thing to each other. Their tastes, their optics, correspond.-—Malice and uncharitablenefs is the medium thro’ which they behold every objedt; -consequently, their private moments and Sentiments must be -diabolical.
I am astonifhed they have not yet had the ingenuity to fix a stain upon Patty’s charadter; but, perhaps, they only tolerate her for the pre-fent,—to aggravate her future mortification ; —for bitterer enemies never merit procured.
The Widow’s Spirits begin to fail her. — Repentance, Harry, is but another name for ap-prehenSion of punishment; for could the thief efcape the execution of his Sentence, or Mrs. Bateman’s place by, any means be Secured to her, neither the one nor the other would look back with contrition.
The forfeiture of her provifion would be as literally the confequence of idle and improper conduft, as the malefafilors Sufferings of his crimes.—She, nevertheless, poffeffes Such abundant good-nature,—that whilst we blame we pity,—and pity what we should blame.
I have remarked to you, in a former epiStle, shat human felicity, in a great meafure, depends
D 2	upon
|2 The HISTORY of
upon the will; and I am Sorry to have occafion to repeat the observation. You remember our concert.—How happy were we !—Lady Sarah’s turbulent Spirit at rest, and Mifs Kennington’s heart over-flowing with fatisfadlion —nor would the addition of'Mrs. Bateman and Mifs Turner’s company have proved an interruption to our harmony, had we but remained strangers to the lovely Patty Price.
You have known the world in a variety of st-tuations; — at court, what vice and inSipidity! —in the city^ what inSolence and meannefs —■ in the country, what roughneSs and brutality ! but none of the Scenes you have ever been ac-■quainted with were half So extravagant, malicious, or ridiculous, as our private circle. The many excellencies of Patty’s perSon and diSpost-tion have Set us .all in a fermentthe men, except Bob, with one conSent love herthe women, exceptMifs Kennington, as unanimoufly hate her ; nor is the conSequence of the one much more agreeable than the other.
Lord Kennington, who piques himfelf upon his talents for amustng, or procuring amufement, propoSed a ball.-—Five couple were by no means
deSpicable.--But many and grievous were the
heart-burnings it occastoned.
I find it will be impoffible to Support it much longer.
His Lordship, prefuming upon his rank, and wonderful Superiority, took upon him to^ difpoSe of us:—Mr.. Bradstaw, Lady Sarah ; —- Mrs. Bateman, Mr. Shugburgh ; So far was tolerably jud icious:	but beheld the falling off:—
Mifs Turner was given to poor Bobby, — Mifs Kennington to the chagrined Finly, and his tottering ‘Lordstiip had the modesty to referve
the
Miss SOMMERVILE. 53
the queen of the company, the beauteous Patty, for his own prize.
Nothing in nature was ever more whimfically contrasted.
The fellow who had been the instrument of our acquaintance with Patty, was our muSician.
Malice lowred on his brow ; and all the ladies that had enjoyed his brutal frolic were admitted as humble fpefitators.— You may guefs their feelings.
A minuet was called for, to open the performance,—The hobbling peer condudled his fair partner to the goal, and made the preparatory bow with viSible triumph when, unfortunately, . his toe, in its. return to a proper poSition for starting with the lady, struck against the stde of a chair, and obliged him to make a precipitate retreat.
Finly stew to fupply his place ; but he decla-' redj with distorted features and interrupted accents, that no one should shine at his expence, for that minuets should be totally excluded.
Half an hour was fpent in rubbing the joint into eafe and elasticity, which was no fooner ac-complished, than we drew up in order.
F'inly jostled himfelf next my Lord. Patty fmiled encouragement upon him, and reluflantly fubmitted to the neceshty of joining hands with any other perfon.
Bob’> eyes wandered after Mifs Kennington.—« The muSic played in vain.—Mifs Turner shoved him about, indeed, to tolerable time, but coni--plained wofully of his heavinefs and stupidity.
It is amazing amongst all thefe vicistitudes that I retain my confequence; but I have not yet de-
D 3	dared
54	The HISTORY or
dared war against their mightiRestes, sty attaching rnyfelf to their mortal enemy.
Youth, Harry, is a pretty feafon ; it inSenfi-bly communicates a charm to propriety, and casts a gentle veil over petty errors, which none but the malicious and envious either wilh or dare to remove.
Patty and Mifs Kennington are at that very period when vanity is- apt to mistead the judgment, and affedation to tinge the manners; yet however contemptible the one, or ridiculous the other, we know not how to condemn them; as they are natural, though exuberant fhoots tf innocent folly, which we are fenstble the maturity of reafon,. and, aequisttion of experience, will of courfe liberally prune. But what Ihall we fay for the affectation that is full grown ~ the cafe of thefe ladies whofe vassal I am deemed ? —Yet however preposterous, I have and must profefs to admire them;—nor is Patty or her friend in any degree fo expeCting or tenacious, as to the article of homage, as Lady Sarah, Mrs. Bateman, and Mifs Turner.
Shave made you master of Lady Sarah’s portrait. Set it in the most advantageous light.,— Well, is she not an engaging figure? Are Such eyes for languishing, — fuch lips for lifping, pouting, or uttering nonfenfe, to be borne / The Widow is turned of forty.—Her face a full* moon, fat, Smirking, and of ample circumference ; her shoulders broad, hips large, and a fist would make you tremble.
Mifs Turner, Some half-dozen years her feni-or, a tawny ungain wretch.—I will not enter into particulars.
Mist
Mis's S O M M E R VIE E. 55
Mifs Ketmington has a happy taste for dreSs. —How fweetly is the cap fuited to her lovely features, the ribbon to her complexion, and the robe to the elegant neck and shape!
‘‘ Sarah, thofe cloaths (cries her Ladyship occasionally) become you. Touch the bell, ** Bradshaw: my woman,, if you-pleafe,—Pray, Preston, (continues she, on her virgin’s pre-“ fenting herfelf) let me fet you to work;— the model is before you.'—Now can’t you fit me as exadtly as Sarah -is fitted, and for once let me be genteel ?—How mortifying to be for ever outdone 1”
Mrs. Bateman, Mifs Turner, and her Lady-shipj are all equipped in a few days;—and what contributed to- shew a lovely figure to advantage, proves-an horrible aggravation of native ugii-nefs.
This is the rock your ladies generally Split upon ; — dupes to every arrogant fine woman, whofe rank intitles her to lead the fashion.— Mifs-Kennington is all good-nature and humility, and either does not really discover her aunt’s absurdity, or most ingenuousty conceals her Senfe of if from every obferver :—but the haughty beauty that would rather Submit to be diSguiSed than not render a whole herd ridiculous, enjoys the aukward imitation, conScious thatunlefs her very perSon could, be given to every individual, the artfully contrived Westment can impart no grace to the wearer.
But what a wretch to rob my friends of their
best enjoyment!--------They live, Harry, no
longer than I am prefent; nor to be plain with you, can I, hereafter, write mySelf out to Such , an immoderate length. I have manifold avo-
D 4	cations
56 The HISTORY OF
\
Cations that demand my attention. My Lord’s jest must be fupported ; Mils Kennington’s modest merit drawn forth to view;—Patty’s wk and addrefs exerciSed and difplayed ;—the honest Shugburgh’s mirth duly encouraged;—Lady Sarah’s malice kept witUn bounds ;—Bob’s vi* vacity Saved from dying ; Mil's Turner’s humour purged from petulance ; and Finly’s love stifled in its infancy.
The ladies have Sent for me.—Forgive, my fair companions, this last trefpafs.—But I have a word for cur Harry to wind up my epistle.
What can occaston your unufual Silence and stupidity ?—News I must have, if not to entertain me, at least to render me entertaining.—You are fenstble of the motive of my confinement to this place.—Deny my request, therefore, if you dare.—But, perhaps, you will plead your privilege. Your —never Swell the catalogue; for it is impossible for me not to remain
Your’s,
LETTER X.
The fame to the fame.
NOW, Harry, all is at an end on this fide the water.— The wind, though rough, blows off the coast, and bids us prepare to launch our little bark,—’Tis true, we were most plea-Singly employed; yet I rejoice at the change for
many
Miss S O 1^1 M E R V I L E. 57
many rcafons, but more eSpecIally on that person’s account who might have been the greatest Sufferer by our detention; for I quession much but Lady Sarah would have relapSed, in Spite of all my vigilance and indussry. Adieu, therefore, to Holyhead, petty adventures, and the impofiti-on of Self-denial and flattery.—My approbation of this amiable creature shall be no longer restrained. If I can be in any degree Serviceable to her, in her future connedlions, it will give me the highest fatisfadiion ; for, if she is not worthy my best regard, to what shall we trust ? —If every modest, every valuable endowment can be assumed at will, and warped to the pur-pofes of deceiving — I shall begin to doubt even the reality of my own existence, Bob’s faith, and . your Sincerity, &c,
X K	* X
**	;	»» s *•	»» 6 e	^	; »•	; *♦ \ ; ,v \ -	\
L E T T E R XI.
From the fame to the fame,
Dublin^
NOTWITHSTANDING' all my resolutions and quick-SightedneSs, this little witch has • eicaped from my knowledge. We had an amazing fine passage for the time of year; and, as I relied upon having an opportunity of declaring my friendly intentions on our difembarkation, I continued to flirt with the ladies as ufual; but judge of my astonishment and mortification, v.shen
D 5	er.fering
58 The HISTORY or
entering the houfe to which all the company had repaired for a little refreshment, and to wait for carriages, I difcovered she was not amongft them.
By enquiring for her I Spread the alarm, and it was evident Mr. Finly’s concern was not inferior to my own.
Lady Sarah laughed at the Fleroine’s elopement, as she raalicioufly stiled her ; adviSing both Finly and myfelf to become errant-knights, and wander in quest of her.
I fupprested my refentment from constderations of infinite weight. Mifs Kennington appeared too little difcompofed at the incident to leave me any reafon to doubt that she was privy to her departure ; and,, had F retorted upon her Ladyship agreeable to the diDates of my heart, I had ex-excluded myfelf from all farther intercourse with the family, and postibility of intelligence.
My Lord'declared, she was a little thief, and he would apprehend her as Such; for she had not only robbed, him of his heart, but Jiolen away herfelf.
Mr. Shugburgh expressed the most lively con-* cern for her welfare. —‘‘ Her beauty (faid he), will expofe her to a multiplicity of inconve-niencies, efpecially if her circumstances are limited, — I would gladly have been a friend to her.—She has deprived me of infinite Sa-tisfaSlion by thus withdrawing herfelf.”
Mr. Finly was Silent : — A filence expressive of the most tender anxiety. —■ I know how to Sympathize with him from my own feelings.
The Widow, who is too giddy for malice, and too lively for ill-nature, did not make a bad figure upon the occaSion. — She would not have
. refufed
Miss SOMMERVILE. 59
refuSed her her countenance or interest, if either would have been ufeful to her.
Mifs Turner, aiming at what nature has denied her, wit, drew her features into an affeSa-tion of forrow, and cried, “ ’Twas vjond.rous
I‘ have not met with any thing that has So thoroughly chagrined me for a long time. — It was an unkind trick, at least wkh refpefl 'to Fin-ly, who fo frequently professed himfelf interested in her fate.—Yet, Perplexity begone I I am a philofopher.'i—Ah, Harry, it withdraws not its daring front; but imperioussy demands. Can philofophy make a Patty ? ■— You may, however, fpare yourfelf the trouble of being Smart upon the occasson, as the distance between us is fo great, that Ibng before your witticifms can reach me, I shall be once more my very felf.
Bob relapfed into the Dolorous on parting with Mifs Kennington, notwithstanding we received many cordial invitations from his Lord-ship to improve our acquaintance.
Finly’s grandfather died three days before our arrival, andshe is confequently become a dignified perfonage. —He neverthelefs has given us his company intirely, or I know not how we should have fupported ourfelves. I own I am Several keys lower than ufuah
.  .. < "A
• .	, A.
L E T~
• <
I
9
6o The HISTORY op
LETTER XI.
I
Mils Kennington to MiSs Carey.
Duhliu.
I T is true, my dear Dolly, that we have at last attained the destined port;— most reluctantly attained it, as more hearts than mine are ready to testify.
But, perhaps, you may be diSpoSed to receive Some account of us previous to our embarkation. That I am willing to oblige you, I hope you have no doubt; but my vivacity, my def-criptive powers, if any I poffeffed, remain at Holyhead, and you must have much leifure, and an extravagant fund of good-humour, if you can patiently perufe the dull epistles I Ihall henceforth prefent you with.
It were better never to have known felicity than furvive its lofs.—Mr. Fleetwood, how will he employ his future hours?— Can he ever forget they were all st Vi-ely devoted to my amufe-rnent ? — And will not the recdleftion occaston him fome little pain ?— For me alone he feemed to live.—But it is a vain and fruitlefs enquiry.— I will therefore re-enjoy what is past, by resigning my foul to thee, thou never-failing friend. Imagination ; and, oh! restore it to that blifs stern reafon would refufe.
Many days had Sweetly pasted away, our
good
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 6i
good liking of each other beyond meafure in-creafed, when the dreadful hour of Separaticn luddenly overtook us.—For, in short, we Seemed to have delivered ourfelves up to the most extraordinary, as well as flattering, of deluSions; — not once remembering by how precarious a tenure our happineSs was SuSpended.
We had dined with our uSual chearfulnefs; and the cloth was Scarce removed, before my Lord propofed, that the enSuing part of the day (to uSe his own words) “ should be given to hai-“ mony.”—“ The voice is ever in tune (Said he) “ when the boSom’s at rest ; and if we may “ trust the countenance of this little circle, we “ cannot apprehend the stightest impediment to “ the test appearances;” — immediately striking up a Soft air, which was evidently warbled at Mils Patty, though as evidently disregarded by her.
It was her turn next. Never shall I forget how well she performed ; her melody, her judgment, were highly extolled.
My lord was very brilliant upon the occaSion. —“ Happily fancied (cried he)!—prettily infl-“ nuated! The double Stroke of the vanity of beauty and the vanity of wit, he could ne-“ ver Sufficiently admire. — Fain is heantfs gau~ dy floiver—(Singing aflPeTedly). — I hope, my “ young lady, that lesson is as profitable with “ you, as your Jloadovj of a fiade shall be with me.—It was well direcied, — and cannot fail “ ol its purpoSe.”
'I’his Sally diverted us all, as alternate Singing and commenting continued to do, for tw'o SucceS-five hours, when we were interrupted by a mu-fic of a more boisterous nature. The wind, my dear, alike perverSe in its constancy as variableness,
62 The HISTORY of
neSs, at that instant shifted its quarter. — All hands were fummoned on board, nor could the unhappily furprifed paffengers efcape a Similar fate.
We arofe; disappointment fat upon every countenance, particularly Mifs Price’s, who be-fought me, in a whifper, to favour.her with a few moments private conversation. -—T retired with her into a little apartment oppoSite the room we were then in.
“ Our time, my dear madam (faid she, as we ** entered), is now .become infinitely precious, ** and I can only intreat you,, if possible, not to ** withdraw your friendship and approbation, “ however you may hear I am circumstanced on our arrival in Dublin. Tknow you Superior “ to every little prejudice narrow minds are fub-‘‘ je£i to; but it wist be no eafy talk.to recon-“ cile your family, to your generous Sentiments. My fituation mean, my origin obfcure, will not your condefcenSion be prohibited and con-“ demned?”
Nothing; Patty. (returned I, eagerly), no-thing shall prevent, my attachment, but what ** can never, happen, a. co.nvi6tion of your, un-worihinefs.— What have I to boast ? — Am I ‘‘ not a -poor dependant upon the bounty, the “— but you know' their diSpcfitions.”
“ Ah ! madam (faid the lovely girl); you for-“ get the. confequence Lord Kennington’s near “ relationship gives you.—Not to afford you the “ prote61ion-you now enjoy, would be to fix an “ indelible stain upon his humanity; but I— “ However, my dear mifs, I vvill not labour the “ point; every one bUt yourfelf, will fee “ things in another light,. It is not in my pow- ^
’ “ er ■
Miss S G M M E R V I L E. ^3
** er (coi\tinued she) to be properly explicit with “ regard to the life I am entering upon ; but-1 “ will take the liberty of informing you by let-.ter, fo foon as I am fettled.—T have reafon to “ apprehend the gentlemen will be abundantly curious to know my destination; and as it is “ not convenient to oblige them, I have deter-‘‘ mined to take a French leave the instant I Set my foot on shore,-notwithstanding I shall ever retain a grateful fenfe of the civility they
have shewn me.—The parting----------”
« Who talks of parting, with a voice So fweet ?” Said his Lordship, with his uSual gaiety, wsho came upon us very abruptly. — “ Our parting, my pretty friend, must be a tranSient one, or a certain acquaintance of “ your’s will be most unhappy. I have long “ obferved (continued he) the growing, aste:6fion of my lovely girls for each other, and hope to find it more' durable than the generality of “ female minds are capable, of. .— No rivalship can ever intervene.— Though, equally at-tra6Iive, your charms are of fo distindb, fo ** feparate a fpecies, that whoever admires the one, can only approve the other,
“ To your care, Sally, (added he with great << Solemnity) I may venture to recommend your other; Self; prevail upon her. to accompany “ you home,, until she has,, at least, recovered “ the fatigue of her passage ;—and tell her, that << the master of. that houfe will never experi-“ ence any degree of felicity, unless she will be-come a frequent vifitant.”
Mr. Finly advanced as his Lordship concluded
this very gallant Speech. --- May I be per-
‘‘ mitted ?” Said he Smiling.
“ Why
64	The HISTORY of
t( Why faith, fir (returned my Lord), you are not more uncpportune than daring in your approach to this Spot. A ssngle temptation, at your time of day, might have proved fufG-‘‘ cient. — Thus doubly — But I leave you to your fate” casting a look at me that I too well understood to be perfefitly compofed.
« My dear ladies (Said Mr. Finly), how stand “ your hearts affedled, with refpefifc to this “ hasty embarkation ? — Could, we not have tasted the utmost Sweets of life, even in this “ narrow, dreary, corner ?—Is there, can there “ be aught in Dublin to compenfate the lofs of amiable friendlhip, and elegant Society ?”
“ I, fir (Said Mifs Price), have abundant rea-~ ‘‘ fon to regret leaving this place. — The indul-** gence shewn me here, I fear I shall Seldom “ know hereafter ; and I am more than ever dif--qualified for the conversation of my equals. Mr. Fleetwood and Mr. Bradshaw now join* ed us.-'-Every one Seemed to wish the other ab^ Sent for private reafons.—But it could not be.—All order, all fatisfadtion, was at an end, and we were-diffatched on board with the utmost expedition.
Patty’s hand was contended for by three valiant knights. — But who knows not the efficacy of titles and dignities ? — My Lord bore away the prize,-'-whilst her lefs happy admirers most reludfantly tendered their Services to the other ladies.
Lady Sarah, very luckily, was ignorant of her Swain’s defedlion, or the lofs of her favour had been irretrievable. ---I had reafon to tremble, as his friend would have been involved in the fame ruin.
He
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 65
He had, in general, conduced himfelf with great propriety.--.Donest nature will not, however, at all times, brock restraint.—Prudence, in conjundlion with refolution, is powerful; but love, my friend, is Superior to both.
You would have been highly diverted at my Lord’s astlduity, fo long as he was capable of being assiduous about the fair one, who was immediately affeQied by the motion of the ship.— But he was not long in a condition to afford her any assistance, and became by much the most pitiable object.
Patty gave me a farewel look, as we difem-
barked. — The tears were ready to start.---1
turned hastily from her— never, perhaps, to behold her more. — She, by Some means or other, contrived to elude all observation, and had conveyed herfelf far from every one’s knowledge, even before they were fenstble of their lofs. ,
My Lord lamented her departure; Lady Sarah triumphed ;—my heart felt a kind of doubtful hope of feeing her again; and the gentlemen were generally concerned and affefted.
Surely, my dear, she will not unkindly deceive me.
You shewed my long letter to mamma, which will anfwer every purpofe for Some time to come : I need, therefore, only add that I am,
most affeffionately your’s,
S. Kennington.
LET
0
66 The HISTORY of
I •	:	:	: i :	: I :	;	:	:	!	3	:	:	<	3	< i
LETTER XII. ■
Mr., Brad,shaw to Mr, Fleetwood.
y	*
Dublin.
JU S T returned from vissting at Lord Ken-nington’s. Bob is a happy fellow. Mifs-Kennington’S' reception of him was to the last degree flattering, and reflored him to life and confequence.
Lady Sarah was not at home on our first arrival.—As for the- gentlemen, they dined at the Caftle, and were net expedied till late in the evening.
We had chatted Some time, and I^'-had pre-, pared a very long Speech, in order to prevail upon the young lady to betray her friend’s trust, when a thundering rap at the door announced Lady Sarah’s return.
She flew up stairs with the utmost rapidity;— -fcarcely bestowed any attention to our civil Salutations,—but appeared in great, though plea* sthg agitation-i
Bob and I stared at each other, nor was Mifs Kennington lefs at a lofs to accountTor her ladyship’s strange behaviour.
At length she vouchfafed to reveal the mighty caufe.
‘‘ If I had not been So fortunate, gentlemen^ “ as to meet with you here, I fancy it would have anSwered, to diSpatch a Special messenger
with.
Miss SOMMERVILE. 67
** with the glad tidings.—Mifs Patty lives ;—ah « lives not lar from hence! Sally, remember you a milliner — in Dartmouth-street she ** dwells,—it being holiday the beggar’s shop is opeity and behind the counter fits Mifs Patty.” The fool your friend started.—Lady Sarah’s heart bounded with malicious pleafure at the fuccefs of her laboured, and evidently preconcerted Speech.
I could perceive the little tradeswoman (re-assumed she) in her whole deportment, and own: my astonishment at the general infatua-“ tion that prevailed.”
“ How will I rally my Lord and Mr. Shug-burgh, who distinguished himfelf fo stngularly “ in her behalf. The pretty creature (continued ‘‘ she in barbarous rapture) had been vifiting the “ English metropolis, in order to fee and con-“ vey fashions from thence. A milliner, a journey-woman milliner! I protest I should have honoured my woman for her condefcen-Sion, if she had taken notice of her—Well, ‘‘ I think we made ourfelves Sufficiently ridicu-lous!”
“ That I am Surprised at what I hear (return-ed your Bradshaw), I must acknowledge ; but am far from entering into the opinion, that it " is any reflection upon either our discernment ‘‘ or understandings, to have treated fucb a girl “ with kindneSs and humanity.—What did we “ more ?—She dined at the Same table indeed,
■—had a modest share in the conversation,— was properly fenSible of the disparity of con-“ ditions, and behaved with unfpeakable hu-militv.”
« Well,
i
ft	I
68 The H I S T O R Y of
‘‘ Well, Sir, (leturned she with an air of | haughty condefcenSion) we will permit you to i defend an error in your judgment.”
Error, Lady Sarah! (replied I, hastily) ** pardon me for borrowing your expreshon;— but, if it was an error, it was a most pleaSing one ;—and do we err then when we pay a due tribute to merit ? Could even your Ladyship’s “ refinement carp at a fingle impropriety in her conversation or behaviour?—Was she not at “ all times fo perfeSlly colledled—fo entirely “ mistrefs of herfelf and the fubje6): she choie to engage upon, as to bid defiance to the ut-’ most malice of criticism ?”
Is she not a milliner? (demanded her Lady-ship, maliciousty exulting)—Did you conceive “ she was a milliner ?—Or, will you take upon ‘‘ you to prove that a milliner is a fuitable com-“ panion for people of rank ?”
Not in public (returned'i), Lady, Sarah; but good breeding, good-fenfe, and a fair re-putation, entitles every female to the kind con-“ fideration of her own fex, let their condition be what it may, in their more retired hours.— Is an humble friend in any degree contempti-« ble ?—Surely no,—when the parade of state is laid aSide, and the heart alone becomes the objefit of contemplation. What fays the pro-“ verb. Lady Sarah (continued I), ’TzV man-ners makes the man-, and a cultivated nature, wherever found, merits regard.”
I won’t quarrel with you (returned she,, with ‘‘ a Sneer).—Men will argue like men.—A pretty face goes far, and levels all distinfilion.”
By no means (Said I, it was a point, Harry “ that deferved to be laboured), there is not a
“ ladv
Miss SOMMERVILE. 69
lady of you all that is more tenacious of what ^ belongs to her chara6Ier than I would be for ‘ her; I would be the last perfon to recommend ‘ an unsuitable companion to accompany her to ‘ the drawing-room, or any other place calcu-‘ lated merely for the refort of fortune’s favou-^ rites;—but I can never bring myfelf to allow ‘ that fuch a perfon as Patty unassuming, grate-‘ ful, and finely accomplistied, tho’ only a mil-‘ liner, or, as your Ladyship, by way of ag-‘ gravation, stiled her, only a journey-woman ^ milliner, is an unworthy tete-a-tete for a dut-chefs.”
Let us have tea, Sarah, faid she (casting adif-‘‘ dainful look at your friend),and another fubje<5t.”
“ O woman! lovely woman! Nature made you, “ To temper man : We had been brutes without you.”
Their power is indeed, most wonderful v/itli refpe6l to us.—Why then will they So utterly negleO; themfelves?—Want of fortune, amongst the men, is not deemed fo heinous, as with the ladies. We can approve merit, however shaded by misfortune.—What then can incite thefe gentle-hearted creatures to be fo unjust and ungenerous to the fussering part of their own weak fex ? For I will maintain it, that were young women (delicately bred, and compelled to be industrious) more generally encouraged and countenanced by perfons in happier circumstances, it would be a cordial to their Spirits, and a Spur to their diligence; and not only prevent their languishing out their days in heart-felt mortifi-'Cation, but preferve them from falling a prey to the wicked, the cruel advantage, mankind are ' too apt to take of their expofed fituations.
Lord
I
70 The HISTORY ot
Lord Finly has been out all day upon bussneSs relative to his deceafed grandfather, and I most impatiently wait his return, to give him a part in the Scene we have been engaged in.—It cuts me to the foul, that Lady Sarah has Such an opportunity of triumphing.
---------------0-------------
LETTER XIII.
Mifs Price to Mifs Kennington..
OH, my dear madam ! did I not tell you, that I was utterly unworthy your consideration and favour ? But you will know the very worst of me before this falls into your hands ; as I dare believe Lady Sarah will be far from extenuating any unfavourable circumstance that may have reached her knowledge.
I had intended to write you an account of my Situation this very afternoon, if I even had been Spared the mortifying rencounter;—but I have this confolation, that however low my fortune may have placed me, my mind is not only un- ■ contaminated by vice, but intireiy devoid of that overbearing cruelty So peculiar to confcious Superiority.
You, perhaps, Smile at my mention of Superb ; ority (a condescending Smile, for you must be a i stranger to every ungenerous pastion), and afk, to whom can you be Superior ^—But you will be pleaSed, madam, to recollect the variety of Sub-bordinaiion life affords; you know, by knowing ;
me, i
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 71
me, that there are little beings; and, permit me to inform you, there are still lefs degrees oF lit-tlenefs.—Infomuch that I am restrained from playing the tyrant (it I am restrained) by distn-clination, not want of power.
I own I am greatly difconcerted by what has happened;—not from pride, that were an unworthy Source. We were not all born for prosperity ; therefore adverstty is the misfortune, not reproach, of humanity.—But her Ladystiip’s difpoSition 1—Did you know how stie treated me. —Sneeringly civil and exultingly cruel.—I beg -your pardon, stie is your near relation;—Yet how little refembling 1
Many incidents concurred to throw me in her way; the good woman in whofe bulinefs I am fixed, happened to be abfent;—the parlor required alteration,—which drove me from thence.— The shop must fooner or later have expofed me to observation, and perhaps as well now as hereafter.
A string of carriages obstrudled her Ladyship’s pastage.—She naturally looked, out to inform herfelf oSthe caufe ; when I, to my great .. mortification, caught her eye and determined her to alight.
So, fo, fellow-traveller (faid-she, as she en-tered the shop), I find you are an ufeful mem-•ber of fociety.—What may that ribband be ' “ a yard ?—^(1 was confufed.)—You are not So “ expert at this trade (continued she), as the last you were engaged in.—The fine lady is your talent. — You really hit off the charafler to
a miracle. But call your mother aunt,”------
“ My mistrefs, madam, (returned I, with '■«« due humility) is not .at home.”
“ Mistrefs!
72 ' The H I S T O R Y of
MistreSs!—Heaven defend me!—(exclaim-1 ‘‘ ed she) And are you So low as that!—Well, ^ “ good-morning to you, I am upon the wing, and will bear your bats mains to Sally and his, Lordship.”
This is one-third of the pretty things she was; pleafed to fay upon the occasson, and I doubt not but she has Set me off to the best advantage.
I ought to make a thoufand apologies not only for forbearing to reveal my employment to you, Seeking to establish myfelf in your friendship and confidence,—converfing with you as it were upon equal terms, but alfo for now prefuming to write to you : but if you can forgive the former, you will not be offended by the latter : it was your request, your injundlion, that I should inform you of my future refidence.—Nay, you encouraged me to hope ; that hope alas! has lost its loundation, and I shall be all fufpence and anxiety until you condefcend to favour me with your final refolution refpedting. Madam,
Your most obliged,
obedient Servant,
M. P.
LETTER XIV.
Mifs Kennington to Mifs Price.
II" OW little, my dear Patty, do you know I of my heart, to conceive it w'ithin the reach of mere externals.—It was your gocd be-
.haviour,
Miss S O M M E R VI L E. 73
haviour,your SenSibility, your very many perfe6li-ons, that recommended you, on our first acquaintance, to my approbation.That approbation was improved into real affefiion and attachment, by a better knowledge of your difpofition and Sentiments.—You tell me they are unchanged ; consequently, my attachment isunfhaken. Nay, 1 know not if the hurnility of your circumstances would not be highly pleaSing to me, if I was not well convinced they are not natural to yourfelf. —There is a Something beyond my penetration. —•But fince you wish to conceal, I will not wish to discover.
It certainly was unlucky that Lady Sarah took you at Such a disadvantage.—-You must not be mortified. But she did not Spare you ; and what was doubly difagreeable, Mr. Fleetwood and Mr. Bradshaw Saw her in her first tranfports of ill-natured exultation.
On my word Mr. Bradshaw warmly defended you. It is plain I am not the only friend your merit procured you. They took their leave before my Lord or Mr. Shugburgh returned home, and a most horrid evening I had of it.
My Lord received the unexpe6ied information with vifible astonishment; and, having paufed a few moments, — “ She is a pretty creature, (Said he) let her rank in life be what it may; nor “ can I apprehend it will be any disparagement “ to our coufin Sarah to take notice of her.’* “ Disparagement! (cried Mr. ShugburgH) “ Who could be difparaged by caresting So vai-luable a young perfon. She shall not want a ** friend, or protestor, if she will accept of me in either charadler. I can stand the shocks of VoL. I.	E	“ raillery.
74 The HISTORY OF
raillery, and the Sneers of malevolence. —-J' “ know not (added he, with the utmost grace of humanity) to shrink from a good caufe, though all the world bessde were to forfake it; nor shall the child of misfortune, if the child of virtue, ever be deferred by me. I will viSit “ her to-morrow.”
Most heroically, and I must beg leave to add, whimSically refolved (cried Lady Sarah): “ but I hope, fir, your tendernefs will not fo far mistead you, as to incite you to attempt in-; troducing her in this houfe.”—	|
“ That article. Lady Sarah, belongs, (faid | ‘‘ his Lordship rather gravely) to me. Mr.;
Shugburgh, I am confident, is too well-bred “ to invade my province ; nor can it be neceffa-“ ry, at this time of day, to teach you your du-ty. Your inclinations are free. — I never even wished to restrain them? if not utterly! extravagant; but I do infist upon it, that Sai-‘‘ ly is likewise allowed (at least under my fanc-tion) to chufe her own acquaintance, amongft “ which number I expe<5l her to rank this moft “ agreeable girl,”
Her Ladyship Swelled, pouted, and even shed tears, but my Lord was immoveable. — “I will “ be obeyed. Lady Sarah (reSumed he with great ** firmneSs). . I have no objeftion to gilding the « pilb but down it shall go. — You may have “ Some new acquifition at heart, — if this will anfwer your purpofe, let it anSwer mine, and ‘‘ it is yours.”— Holding out a note for what Sum I could not distinguish.
“ It is mine, my Lord, (Said she, eagerly “ catching at it) and I am your’s. There is no
‘‘ refift-
v
i
5
Miss SOMMERVILE. ‘75
relisting the arguments you make uSe of.” —. His Lordship kissed her, gave me an approving nod, and peace was once more' re-established.
You may therefore, prepare yourfelf for an invitation, which I thus prepare you to accept, ©r 1 shall ever entertain an indifferent opinion of your Sincerity. You have told me my conversation, my Sentiments are agreeable to you.—-Come then and enjoy, as well as communicate, that best fatisfaQ;ion of mortality, the Society of an approved and beloved companion.
This Supercilious Lady Sarah will not be an impediment to our chat, as her pride will induce her to avoid what her reafon cannot but admire.
I am, &c.
S. Kennington. LETTER XV.
■rSt
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
AnD fo, my worthy Harry, you really conclude, that I am become a convert to the whining fedt. I own your Satire is prettily point ed, your condolence Spirited, but utterly mif-placed.
It is true, I admire Patty Price, feriousty admire her: have made her the fubjedl of more than one epistle, and defcribed her mental and
E a	corporeal
76 The HISTORY op
corporal lovelinefs in glowing terms; yet is my heart as whole and entire as when we parted.
E have a playfulnefs in my nature, that I am Surprized to find has efcaped your obfervation, as vrell as that of your brother and Lord Finly, who are most egregiousty taken-in from judging of my breast by the tender propenfity of their own. I humour their error ; and if you are misted after this confellion, you can have nothing to charge me with.	|
That I was concerned at her elopement, I will not deny. — Thou vile distinguifher! — Is it then a conSequence that we must love when we compaffionate an objedi: ? —- but I was piqued at Lady Sarah’s ridicule. — A strong mark, indeed, — Nay more; I defended, justified her. —• Ah,, pitied and applauded her.
But come, let us Search this wounded mar more attentively, nor Suffer ourfclves to mistake bruifes for fractures.— Here we have him mofli excellently difplayed in the following converfati-1 on, nor shall we be longer deceived.	!
You must first, however, understand that I owe Finly a fort of grudge for ousting me in Bob’s affedlion. Before his arrival, how effen-1 tial my prefence to the young man’s happinefslS He could not eat; he could not laugh without! Bradshaw ; — but the agreeable Finly no Sooner [ appeared, than I was confidered as a kind of fu-| perior, incapable of entering into the little Soft-i ‘■neffesof their fancies; consequently .was shunned! ‘and difregarded.	[
j He received the intelligence we were fraught! with from Lord/Kennington, with the utmoft
com*
1
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 77
compoSure. ** Are you ret Surprized, (demand ** ed Ij ?”—
** No, Sir (returned he, a little testily); nor in the least d pree troruSied. Our knowledge “ of Mils Price began in mystery : you do not ** idly imagine, 1 hope, that you have now at-** tained tile unravelling. — Some fecret perfecu-“ tion, feme great calamity, has, I doubt not, compelled her to become a wanderer ; and, for “ her better Security, placed her in the circum-stances Lady Sarah found her. But how little ** does she know of herfelf when she conceives it poshble for merit like hers to be hid. At the fame time that I am charmed with her humi-“ lity (continued he, looking very wife)! I trem-“ ble for her reputation, and repofe: fomething “ must be done to convince her of the necelflty there is for proceeding upon a different plan.” The short manner in which I was taken up by my Spark, Suggested a frolic. — It was evident fromshis whole behaviour that he was a proper objedf to work upon. — The green-eyed men-Jier jealoujy delights to prey upon the warm in blood. I, therefore, demanded with affedled heat;
“ And, pray fir, what step would you in your great prudence recommend ? But you cannot “ mean to instnuate that you are more interested “ in her happinefs than fome other perfons who “ would think themfelves grofsly affronted if they were to be excluded from a knowledge ** of her sttuation.”
My good friend, (Said the terror-struck ** Bob) your w’armth upon this occaston alarms me. — Surely you cannot mean; — it would “ be ridiculous to difagree about a young
E 3	woman
The HISTORY of
woman whole heart may be already bestowed upon a third perfon. — I love you bcth, and “ shall be unfpeakably hurt if you do not love “ one another.’’
Thou art an honest fellow, (replied FInly, with assumed chearfulnefs, but fomewhat ti-“ mid) Bob. ■—■ I would not hefitate to expofe my life in So lovely a creature’s defence; but am far from intending to invite your Frank to a tilting match. I own she has stolen incon-ceivably upon my approbation; but it would be highly chimerical, as you obferve, to dif-pute a prize that may be equally beyond our reach; we will talk no more of it.”
This was giving edge to my Satire, (Thou limple gudgeon, the bait is deadly) — and incited me to make him Smart more Severely.
“ Not talk of it! ’tis well, fir, your prefent eafe has been purchafed at my expence. How ** finely have I Suffered my most material in-“ terests to become fubServient to the prefervati-on of a little paultry tranquility! — What “ vile impreffions may not have been given of me I”
‘‘ Aprotejiing countenance f —■ do not harbour difingenuous Sufpicions (cried he); -I have nei-ther attempted to communicate; nor has she> “ I dare believe, imbibed the minutest prejudice against you.
If I have had more frequent opportunities ‘‘ of entertaining her than yourSelf, I have not leSs to complain of: her Serious attention to every tender Subjedl was most unkindly with-held.
“ Once, indeed, I pressed her So hard that!
“ extorted
Miss S O M M E R V T L E. 79
** extorted a reply fufficient to chill every rissng hope.”
“ I detest affeSlation (faid she), therefore will “ not deny but I understand your prefent mean-ing; but give me leave to aik you what idea you entertain of my intelle6is, if you fuppofe me capable of being captivated by mere he-roics ? Our acquaintance is very young, ~ commenced after an extraordinarv manner;— my appearance; but not to dwell upon every unfavourable particular, I will, at once, in-form you that your profeshons, instead of flat-tering my vanity, mortify me extremely. It is derogatory to your charafter to make them ; and to listen to them would be a reproach to “ iriine. If it is really agreeable to you to be treated by me with friendship and unreferve, “ give me this one convincing proof, — forbear-“ ing henceforth to introduce So wild, fo pre-posterous a fubjeft.”
I was Subdued. — ‘‘You are a man of honour, “ Finly, (faid I) and I will be Satisfied, thus far, “ in playfulnefs.” But I was tempted to add, from real affedlion for his Lordship :
“ But you can never intend to unite yourfelf “ to So humble, fo obfcure, however amiable a “ girl; your family expedls.”
Behold the constru6lion!
“ O dear, Mr. Bradshaw (returned this tardy “ Lord)! my family is infinitely indebted to you “ for your tender regard for their honour and “ dignities— (very ingenioufly urged): But, “ pray, do you conceive yourfelf to be a perfon “ of fo little confequence ? —> your father the “ representative of an ancient borough, and in
E 4	pof-
8o The H I S T O R Y of
“ poITeffion of an unencumbered estate of two “ thoufand pounds a year; that you may make “ what eleQion you pleafe without cenfure or clamour/’
I was hurt by his folly, and intended to have made him fenSible of it; therefore replied :
“ The more considerable the distance, my “ Lord ; ”—But I had not patience to proceed; — petulance was predominant. — “ We will, however^ leave the point undifcusted (Said 1, peevistily). — Our difposttions are fo widely oppostte that it would be to little purpofe. — The friend and the lover is with you the fame ** thing.”
True, Mr. Frank, (cried he, breaking in ** upon me with an air of triumph) and the warmth you have shewn upon this occaston, ‘‘ is an undeniable proof of your capacity to “ keep the chara6fers distinct.”
W e were fo much unhinged by this idle altercation that the whole evening was fpentat crofs-purpoSes. Whatevei I advanced was contradifl-ed, ridiculed, or difputed by the polite Lord Finly. I was too wife, however to be difgust-ed ; and was actually concerned to fee him fo far gone in, at best, an extravagant passion. I am too much a man of the world to overlook the inequality of their sttuations, end exceedingly rejoice on every account, that Bob’s idol is not equally exceptionable.
As to the article of fortune, I have but little to fay : Lord Kennington’s estate is largely dipt; but as you are determined to remain a batchelor, your brother certainly has it in his power to indulge his inclination. — Family and fine accomplishments are Sufficient.
O Patty!
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 8i
O Patty! Patty I how unjust does this pride of the world render us! You are by no means inferior to MiSs Kennington in every pleassng, every attradfive qualification ; — but alas! the iron hand of Poverty has marked you for his own; and you are undoubtedly, the offspring of Some humble pair. — Yet is Lord Finly’s heart irrecoverably gone; and I believe that minds of a Similar compofition with his, when once Subdued, are ruined for ever.
Your happy elastic natures, that are ready to receive, yet incapable of retaining, any impresti-on.----I cannot philoSophize. — Oh thou un-
gracious deity! tell me what are the advantages of fight, when thou, though blind, art an infallible marks-man; whilst many with two lively, and in general penetrating eyes, are as unable to discover, as elude, thy miSchievous intent.”
I am, &c.
LETTER XVI.
Mifs Ke N NTN G T O N tO MiSs C aREY.
Believe me, Dolly, you ever poffeffed the first place in my esteem and affedlion; but you have unfpcakably endeared yourSelf to my heart by your great tendernefs and generofity to my dear unfortunate mother. — She has told me all your attention, your diligence, your almost filial regard ; — nor will I envy you all the noblest gratifications of humanity. — You have
E e	healed
'4
\
82 The H I S T O R Y of
healed my better part: mine were merely the Sufferings of pride! — But what name is Sufficient!) strong for the pangs she has endured ! -— I Sy! I must fly reflections I am unable to Support !
How agreeably you flatter me, that the trifling Scenes I am engaged in afford you amufe-ment.
I expedied no Icfs from your good-nature than that you would interest yourfelf in Patty’s concerns. She is an amazing girl, — nor can I always fupprefs the wildest conjedfures, refpecting her real charadter and connexions; — but as it is a folly to indulge unmeaning fancies, I will proceed with that part of her history that lies before me.
Lady Sarah having vouchsafed to inform us that She was engaged for the day, a card was difpatched with the joint approbation of my Lord and Mr. Shugburgh to Inlreat Patty’s company during her abfence.
She would gladly have declined the invitation on one perfon’s account, however eligible the other’s in. her most partial estimation. Policy, nevertheless, prevailed ; Some conceffions are inevitable ; — fhe must either endure the persecutions of foppery at little periods, or for ever exclude herSelf from the happy delights of friendship ; — nor fhali (he fail of her reward; for I will strain a point, but before this week’s termination Mr. Shugburgh and I will have her one w'hole evening to ourSelves.
Nothing can be imagined more lovely than her appearance. — Her elegance, her modesty I had long been acquainted with; but a certain felf-poffeffion or tranquil dignity was now apparent.
Miss SOMMERVILE. 83
rent, the Significance or Source of which could not be misunderstood. — We knew her for what Ihe was, yet were unable to withdraw thoSe favourable ientiments we imbibed at Holyhead; nor was she in any degree ashamed of a voluntary, a worthy industry.
How contemptible does she make me appear in my own eyes! I shrunk and was confounded in my hour of adverfity ! — Habitual idleneSs and mean pride difinclined me to work; but to beg, I could defcend with the utmost alacrity.— The bread of dependence was the bread my fer^ vile nature could fubfist upon ; and to Secure my body from labour, I have delivered up my mind to the cruel yoke of restraint.
My Lord, upon my word, his parade alarms me! — the objeci; fo charming! — his fenfibility fo strong I — yet it is impostible! He is at least threefcore, my dear; a period very unfuitable for gallantry and intrigue. — He is in truth a very ridiculous — but I do hope, for the honour of the family and the continuation of the fatisfadtion I at prefent enjoy, that he is an inoffenfive being. I am under no apprehenSions for Patty’s virtue ; but our friendly intercourfe would be totally interrupted by fuch an incident.
Mr. Shugburgh is furely the worthiest creature living. With ail the tendernefs of a father, and the benevolence of humanity, he cautioned her against the evils of life, pitied her expoSed Situation, and applauded her industry.
‘‘ My fortune, (faid he) my little friend (the epithet his good-nature ever bestows upon her) is not an extenfive one; yet, if Providence had “ blessed me with fuch a daughter as yourfelf,
“ how
f
84 The HISTORY of
“ how happily would it have enabled me to pio-“ vide for her!
“ At prefent, excluded as I am by my fituati-‘‘ on from every expence, the receipt of my in-“ terest-money conveys no raptures to my heart: “ nor, fuch is the depravity of the world’s judg-ment, can I employ it agreeably tomy wifhes.
Were it possible to improve the hint, (con-tinned he in the kindest accents) Sir Richard Steele has given us of rational taste, in his “ amiable Beville, with what delight should I ** behold one of Nature’s most perfedl produ6Ii-ons sheltered from every rough, every cruel “ blast, by only accepting (as he phrafes it) a “ little ufelefs ore that, however othcrwife em-“ ployed, could not purchafe fatisfaflions by any means adequate.”
And pray, Mr. Shugburgh, (demanded his ** Lordship, hastily) what has this imaginary bugbear the World to do with the tastes of ** particular individuals ? — The few Bevilles “ that are publ.ickly known, at least in that cha-** rafter, is merely owing to the few Indianas; *( — but shew me the man, or woman either, ** that could objeft to your choice.”
Alas, my Lord (reiurned the goodxreature) common opinion will be grofs; the shocking
“ appellation of keeper !----”
“ The more refined (Said his Lordship) would « give it a Softer epithet.”
‘‘ This is not the age for refinement (re-** replied Mr. Shugburgh) ; and I again repeat, that the odium of Keeper and Kept would ** be cast upon an aft of the most exalted bene-“ volence.”
» TheSe
.>
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 85
Thefe double-natured, theSe amphibious “ animals, (Said my Lord, turning to Patty)
“ have ideas no leSs preposterous than their own ** existence; but if I might be permitted to take the lead without interruption, I could give a more just as well as beautiful likeneSs of men and things.”
“ I should be alarmed, my Lord, (Said the worthy man) at the evil tendency of your pre-Sent finesse; but for the confidence I have in “ Patty’s taste and principles. — They must be beyond the reach of the most Subtle breath • ‘‘ of impropriety.”
‘‘ Your language (returned the peer, with an air of confcioLis Superiority) is lingular: — I “ question if you have one determinate idea. — Harkee, Shugburgh, wherein do you conceive the essence of propriety to con-
« fist?”
Do you, my Lord, purfue essences ? (Said “ Mr. Shugburgh, with honest difdain) I judge “ only of fubstances. It is true, you have the “ advantage of me in point ot education; but common fenfe is common fenfe, let it fall to ‘‘ whole share it will; nor are its operations leSs strong or lefs beneficial in my breast than yours,”
“ Indeed, gentlemen, (Said Patty, with her ufual modeSty and fweetnefs) you may Spare “ your very critical difcussion of a fubje(5i that I “ own confufes, without enlightening, my un-derstanding. I remember the argument be-“ gun in benevolence, whatever might be the collateral views of its investigation ; but as it “ can in no degree affeft either my circum-stances or fentiments, I would humbly intreat
** .the
86 The HISTORY of
#
“ the conversation might be Somewhat more
general.”
My Lord kissed the hand that was next him; called many powders to witnefs he would rather die than offend her; — and a lefs particular fub-jeft was immediately introduced.
But what think you of this right honourable coxcomb : I muss out with it, Dolly, though it may become Mr. Bradshaw to give titles that I ought to difcountenance. O duty! propriety! gratitude! how am I dead to your every feeling!
Indeed, my dear, I begin to apprehend that feme Singular Scenes are preparing, in which I shall be more than a bare fpeftator, Iiy what manner to condufb, or by what means extricate myfelf, I know not; but I hope my heart will not betray me into evil. If all is right there, I shall not fail: wit, genius, learning, are not the things moss needful. The bess head may become giddy, unlefs duly regulated and ressrained by judicious principles.
Oh England! Oh my mother! shall I never See you more I
\
LETTER XVII.
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
I Wish I could give my beloved, tho’ Satirical Harry, a good account of thefe Silly fellows; but wish in vain. Ail my remonssrances, my
admonitions,
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 87
admonitions, are ineffeftual; and they still remain dupes to the idle infatuation of their own bright fancies.
Lord Kennington and I took an airing this morning in the Phoenix-park; his head and heart is full of Lord Finly and his niece. — “ What a charming couple, Mr. Bradshaw! (cried he “ in one of his foppish extaSies.) You have ever beheld the girl with a favourable eye; do you think she is unqualified for a coronet “ She was born but a few removes, my Lord, ‘‘ (returned 1, with a view to mortify him) from ‘‘ the actual claim to one; and but for the im-pediment of a fet of petticoats, would at ** this hour be shouldering you out of poffef-“ Sion.”
Vile Suggestion I (exclaimed he) Every dog should have his day, Bradshaw ; and Surely, without vanity, my fun has feme hours yet to run.”
What could one fay to Such an old coxcomb ?
“ I fuppofe Lady Sarah (refumed he) has told you how Patty Price is filuated: you young fellow^s, on my word, you are dangerous ac-“ quaintance for her ; but I trust you have too “ much honour and humanity to make unwor-thy attempts on fo loyely a creature I
I abjure the thought, my Lord (Said I with Some warmth, in order to make an imDrefiion “ on his shriyelled heart)! for vou must know, I fufpefit ■— but let the event Speak for us both ; and hope, for the fake of her reputati-“ on and repofe, that it wil! be as foreign to “ every other breast as mine.”'—“ Though, (ad-“ ded I, with no weak emphafis) I believe she
« is
88 The HISTORY of
** is very capable of defending the virtue she ap-pears to love, and would palpably feel the ** cruelty and bafeneSs of that bold wretch that might affront her with propofals.’^
Ah! ah 1 my friend (returned his empty Lordship)! this is very good reafon; but not one fpark of love—Love is a powerful deity, and frequently hurries his votaries into strange improprieties. Have you not vistted her ?” My Lord r”
I apprehend you, (cried he with an extra-“ vagant wife look); I am impertinently curious;
but you must not be furprifed if I imagine “ your referve has a meaning.”
“ Your Lordship has my free conSent, (re-plied I) to put whatever construdiion you pleafe upon my forbearing to anfwer q questi-‘‘ on I can by no means understand.”
Shugburgh doats upon her (refumed his Lordship, unwilling to part with fo delight-ful a fubjeQ:); Lady Sarah and he have had many fmart engagements on her account; but “ he has too much of the Tar in his nature to “ be eafily conquered,—and has given her La-dyship many rough falutes.”
The Phcenix-park is feven miles in circumference ; judge then what a comfortable ride I must have of it; for I have given you the cream of our converfation.
W^e returned about three.----His Lordship
pressed me to take a dinner with him ; but Lady Sarah was an objeSt I durst not encounter: the milliner, the journey-woman milliner, might have been brought upon the carpet, and I, perhaps, thrown too much off my guard for Bob’s
interest;—■
■
f
0
Miss SOMMER VILE. Zg
interest -I, therefore Sauntered home to be cut of harm’s way.
Can you think it extraordinary that idleneSs, which is the root of evil in general, stoufd mif-lead my poor unguarded steps ? So far from being under a necessity to paSs through Dartmouth-strcet, it was considerably out cf my way. *— I, however, strolled thither, in order to reconnoitre the milliner’s; but had the misfortune to find the shop unfurnished, Save by one fingle doudy.—I therefore very politically pasted carelefsly on, as I was far from wishing to make a fashionable vi-fit, which, you are fenSible, is literally contriving to pay your rerpefls to an emptL'Iioure.
It is a pity but Mr. Shugburgh would take Patty’s cafe into confideration : your elderly gentlemen may do abundance of things with a good grace that we greener Sparks should be hunted down for. She would have been more Safely as well as judiciousty fituated in a family; yet, blockhead that I am what family could receive her, without danger to them or herfelf, if it confisted of hushand, father, brother. Son, or even a miferable male domestic ?
Suppofe you, Harry, who are one of your regular still-liv’d mortals, was to take her into your houfe as a companion for—your lister.
The world, indeed, cannot be fo well acquainted with your heart as I am ; but I dare believe you incapable of every dishonourable wish, and your understanding would Secure it^res. from all legal impropriety.—No no, it is-doux, the time of day for you to be romanticall''^cr of tached.	'"tation
As to FInly, he is hooked in with a wi^ucrece
nor can I be anSwerable for confequences: ot mif-
■^mploy
90 The H I S T O R Y of
at that age of difcretion, when folly is the ripest and most irrestrainable; for what man of five-and- twenty would fubmit to be advifcd ?
We have fuch daily instances of abfurdities in the condudl of young fellows who have attained the eminence of twenty-one, that I am of opinion, a new regulation in the laws of our mother-country refpedilng minors, would be highly beneficial to the public.
By thirty, indeed, Some little knowledge and experience may be acquired ; but the boy is not in any degree shook off when the arrogant, the felf-fufficient man is assumed, at the early period that now puts our youths in poffestlon of their wills and fortunes : no other rule of choice for their intimates, than humouring their inclinations; no better view in their purfuits, than gratifying their vanity or ambition ; and no worthier purpofe in their hearts, than proving them- : Selves lads of Spirit, what must be the profpefi; I of their friends ?
For this end their table is overfpread with delicacies to pamper the undeferving.—Hounds and horfes are the grand objedts of their care and attention ; and ladies of the gayest and most vicious turn, alone the favourite companions of their foster hours. The modest fair ones they industriousty shun,—Infipid lifelefs creatures ! incapable of admiring the only wit they have any idea ost —Thus they run on from one Scene of prciauchery to another, banishing refledlion by dy S', and stifling rernorfe by irreligion,—-until the i fortunes and constitutions are totally de-hav^ ed; and the last bed, they can perhaps call haps, own, refigns them, after horror and lan-iment, to a miferable grave.
You
Miss SOMMERVILE. 91
You have a Seat in the great houfe of Britain. -—Improve the hint this letter contains, and, believe me, you will Save many families of dif-tinffion in the next generation, from Sinking into oblivion. Thirty is the earliest moment a man ought to be trusted with himfelf, allowing full four-and-twenty years for the workings of vanity, the other half dozen for the maturing o£ reafon.
1 am,
LETTER XVIII.
Mifs Kensington to Mifs Carey.
TO give you, my dear Dolly, an idea of the horrid furpriSe I this morning experienced, I transcribe the letters that occastoned it, and my resteflions in due orderand befpeak your most Serious attention.
Mifs Price to Mifs Kennington.
IT would be making a very ill return for the favours you have conferred upon me, were I to deny you a participation in my pleaSures. Read, my dear mifs, the enclofed billet-doux, and v/hen you have lamented the power of my charms, lament alfo the cruel temptation “ to which they expofe me,—Ah! a Lucrece “ would be no Lucrece here! — But do not mif-
employ
92 The H I S T O R Y of
employ the precious moments! —I hate anti-cipation myfelf; yet — but read, read the epistle,”
Lord Kennington to MISs Price.
(N. B. For your information.)
IS it possible, my pretty fprightly crea- j ture ! that your prefent unworthy obfcurity ** can fit eafy upon you? O never, never? your ** heart and countenance cannot correrpcnd ;
** but whilst the one is overfpread with the most ** captivating Smiles, the other must languifh,
“ droop, and repine !
As for my part, steep forfakes my pillow :
" to the foft pleafures of tranquility I have long ** been a stranger :—the effefil is naturalthe caufe must be obvious.
“ Your good fenfe furely cannot but fecure:
“ you from stmple prejudices—* Your face ! —
“ oh I let it be Seen, and Scandal itSelf will ex~-** pire! You are accountable to no one for your ** afitions: your relations (if you have any near ** ones), I am perfuaded, are a preposterous race “ of mortals, whether they have bafely aban-** doned you, or provoked you to renounce their authority.—You was born to command—For-tune, admiration, are fo intirely. your due,
** that I can only intreat you to affume your rights.—My estate, every faculty of my foul, shall be implicitly devoted to your will; dif-** pofe them as you pleafe; they are at prefent '^ “ my torment; but, if you will vouchfafe, to “ employ them in your Service 1 how unfpeakar “ bly happy will they render me!
** I have
/
Miss 8 0 M M E R V I L E. 93
** I have a Sweet houSe and park at a Small distance from Dublin ; they (hall henceforth “ be yours. My coach Shall not only convey ** you thither, but remain tor your ufe. You will find a variety of walks, little rivulets, and delightful shades; to me it will prove a “ ParadiSe,. if once-furnished with the fairest daughter of the creation !
“ Talk not of the world ; its stavish customs Suit the groveling multitude; but you, — you “ must deSpiSe them,
“ Think not of folitude i nor once conceive me capable of leaving you one moment with-out an agreeable companion.-'-Sally shall ac-company you, attend you. — Mufic, every “ elegant amuSement, shall await you.—Then, “ do not hefitate ; but let to-morrow morning be the commencement of my happineSs and “ your fovereignty. I shall impatiently expeS: your anfwer, and am,
my dear girPs most faithful admirer,
Kennington,”
MiSs Price in Continuation.
And what anfwer do you think I have re-** turned ? A proper one. — I hope So, madam. They fay every one has an opportunity Sooner or later of making their fortunes; but that an ** opportunity lost is not Soon regained.
‘‘ I beg, Mifs Kennington, you will be pre-** pared to render your elf vd’ry entertaining, “ obedient, and twenty So-forths. — Perhaps a ‘‘ change of circumstances may occafion a change of distoSition. — Caprice, wh^Sy.—-Well, I will torment you as little as postibic,
V i€ for
94 The H I S T O R Y of
“ for old acquaintance Sake ; but you must not “ be offended, my dear, if. I am a little trou-
blefome. — What a blessed fcheme !-------
And can you mean Patty ?—why not —If ‘‘ you come to that, madam, how can my Lord? i( —to matrimony, it is a dull, heavy, phleg-matic institution; the basts of all ill.—Wrang-lings and difcontent would not Suit me. — I “ shall be a nominal lady, have a Substantial coach and stx; — and for the rest, you and I ‘‘ will Settle it.
But, alas I alas! you are So demure, I “ know not what to think ; if you should call me harsh names, or behold me with con-tempt, I could never Support it; — but you ‘‘ will be better instructed, and I can have no-‘‘ thing to fear ; therefore my baije-mains to his lordship ; tell him I accept his terms, provi-“ ded you Surrender yourSelf as hostage, as the encloSed letter with his Superscription will in-form him — and you too, if you are wife e-“ nough to read it before you Seal it; and con-yey it (as I humbly intreat you will) to his toilet, — where he may peruSe it at his leiSure.
I am, my dear Madam,
your obliged, and affeCtionate
M. Price.”
But Softly, my friend, — previous to the letter here referred to, I must preSent you with my wisdom upon the occaston.
No language can deScribe ray grief and indig-na!:ior>! —A fcliioquy was the conSequence.
No, I v/il! read no more: Unhappy creature, that I am! — what will become of me I but be
assured
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. '	95
assured I never will deScend to Such infamy!—' be the companion of my Lord’s!—He is a monger to propofe it! and as to her—well, well, let them rejoice in their iniquity; and may their own consciences be their punishment I—Yet it can never be—am I awake 1 — Oh yes! she is funk to the lowest ebb of vice; and what renders her peculiarly odious in my Sight, is her attempt to reduce me to the fame level. No one palliating circumstance — what an eaSy prey — follicited, and complying in the Same instant.— No love, no confidence abufed. — I am fo astonished, shocked, and bewildered, I know not what to think! So amiably referved at Holyhead, — fo admired for every valuable endowment. —-Mr. Eradshaw, Lord Finly, evidently taken with her as much as my wicked relation.—How could she ever fall fo grofsly from her integrity ? I will never fee her more. — I can never believe again.— It is a most Severe and unexpected stroke!
—■ A paiife — 1 will, however, fee her in her most odious light: no doubt but I shall find a cure for the Soft regret her lofs occafions me in her anfwer to the vile propofals.—I accordingly opened the letter, which in my rage I had thrown afide, and read as follows:
Mifs Price to the Earl of Kennington.
My Lord,
** I think it my duty to put the enclofed *
* ReCerring to the letter his Lordfhip Sent her, which (lie takes this method to return ; and rebuke his iniolence, by affedting to believe it fpurious.
letter
p6 The H I S T O R Y of
letter into your Lordlhip’s hands; and am no << lefs shocked than concerned to find myfelf in *« the fame country with So daring a rafcal.
“ F’erhaps you may be able, either from the « stile or charadlers, to guefs the author.—Can any punishment be too Severe for him ? — « What I assume a name of Such distindlion for “ no better a purpofe than affronting and terrify-«< ing a poor unhappy fugitive!—But I will think no more of it: I know myfelf Secure of your Lordship’s generous protodlion and favour; and flatter myfelf they will never be forfeited by any effort of malice or wilful im-propriety.
“ Upon cooler confideration : Suppofe you was to commit the letter to the flames, and “ let the memory of it perish with it; for in « chastifing the villain you would, too probably, ** expofe yourfelf to danger; for there is no au-«« dacious or perfidious attempt that I cannot « conceive Such a wretch to be capable of.
The share is intended lefs for my virtue than perfon : he must be an arrant kidnapper, «« and would fell me to Some of the plantations.
I am, my Lord,
with all due gratitude and Submission, your Lordship’s obedient Servant,
M. P.”
Are you not agreeably furprifed, my good girl, at this turn? A thoufand pound weight has been removed by it from my heart —Had she proved the creature I aprrehended, how defert and forlorn this country-in my estimation I but
cheated
Miss SOMMERVILE. 97
cheared and amufed by her innocent vivacity, my life, my happinefs, will derive new vigour; and 1 shall be able to Subscribe mySelf, as of
1 a i c >
Your well-contented friend.
*>i- A	'•♦S’* A* **n- A.	’
LETTER XIX.
Lord Kennington to Mrs. Bateman. Madam,
I Am forry to hear of your disappointment;
but you may depend upon my ussng my best endeavours to reinstate you in your office. A lady of your merit and good-nature can never want friends; and I again repeat, you may rely upon my warmest interest.
Apropos to the fubjeQ; of good-nature; you remember our little fellow-voyager Patty Price, whom we were all inclined to conceive the highest opinion of.—In faQ:, madam, we were deceived, as to her family and connedfions:—she appears to be only an industrious member of the community, at w'hofe shop fuch pretty ladies as Mrs. Bateman may furnish themfelves with a-bundance of becoming ornaments, as ribbons, caps, Szc.
Neverthelefs, I must acknowledge myfelf one of her very great,admirers, and should rejoice in every opportunity of countenancing and Serving her.	N.
VoL. L	F ■	But
98	Thp history of
But she is the oddest creature — So wrapt up in reServes, and So apprehenSive of male civility, that it is impossible to gratify the benevolent wish of my heart without your assistance.
What can be deny’d to friendship ?—Obfervel me well.—I request you to oblige me no longer I than you find your account in it.	|
Accommodate yourfelf to her humour: letj her be a frequent vifitant at your houfe, and bej assured that houfe shall be a treafure to you. Ifj she accepts your invitations, and I should fome-| times interrupt your tete-a-tete^ could it be offen-l five to either of you? —.Ladies are feldom dif-| pleafed at a little gallantry; efpecially when tbet gallant is a man of figure and honour,	|
Should this propofal chime in with your in-| clinations, I shall expefl; to be favoured withal line. Your own good fenfe will point out tbel impropriety of my being known on this OC' cafion.
I am, your humble Servant,
Kennington.
LETTER XX.
Mrs. Bateman to Lord Kennington. My Lord,
The unexpedled favour of your Lordship: letter was a cordial to my heart.—I wai upon the brink of a precipice, and knew noti means of efcaping.
Ohlijf
'^Miss SOMMERVILE. 99
Oblige your Lordship ! Can my patron, my preferver, doubt me?—^ You have restored me to hope and happineSs, yet condeScend to follicit, where you ought and shall ever command.
I will go this afternoon to the pretty creature and pay my compliments; and do flatter my-felf, that m.y abilities and industry will be both judiciousty and Successfully employed in your Lordship’s cauSe.
The Secret was not Safer in your own breast, than it shall ever remain in that of.
My Lord,
your Lordship’s most obliged, grateful, and dutiful humble Servant,
Bateman.
'If WWWWWWW V WWWWWWWW
LETTER XXL
Lord Kennington to Mrs. Bateman.
TFIANKS, thanks, my dearest madam!
ten thoufand thanks for your agreeable acquiescence! though you cannot, at prefent, be aware of the difficult talk you have undertaken.
I am already formidable in Patty’s light. — Rank, fortune, Splendor, are with her empty Sounds; nor does meannefs appear to be more her birth-right than voluntary eledston.
Be it your bufinefs to infpire her with diflFer-ent Sentiments: the heart that is unfuSceptible
Fa	of
100 The HISTORY of
of vanity and ambition, must be invincible to the nicest or most Subtle attacks of gallantry. Where vanity is wanting,flattery loSes its charms; and what estimation would the unambitious Set Tjpon a necklace of diamonds r
However, you may take it from me, no character w'as ever compleat: the foible, the foible discovered, and the clue is obtained. But application cannot Sit eaSy upon a fair lady, unleSs the prize is SufFiciently attractive. ■—Your patent will be made out in a few days • and in the interim accept of the enclofed note. I will take a dish of chocolate with you in a morning or two: and
am, &c.
Kennington.
P. S.
I think it w'ould not a little promote our bust-nefs, if you was to affeCt a wonderful kindnefs for my niece: they are romantically attached to each other. Favour their interviews; they will be ufeful. Adieu.
LETTER XXII.
Mifs Price to MlSs Keknikgton.
T Have had a vliit, my dear madam,, from 1^ Mrs. Bateman : upon my word, she is a rriost excellent creature ! never was I treated with
more
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. loi
more tendernefs and civility in my whole fife.
She gently chid me for my want of confidence in her.—“ To conceal yoiirfelf (faid she) from the gentlemen’s knowledge, or even the “ haughty I^ady Sarah’s, was both natural and ** commendable ; but tell me, my good girl, what could deter you from intrusting me.— “ My manner is, indeed, giddy; but, I hope, not overbearing or forbidding.”
I knew not well how to excufe myfelf: thus the overfcrupiilous are ever creating difficulties for themfelves.
We were strangers, indeed ; but the Similarity of our fex, and her apparent good-nature, were undeniable motives to a contrary conduO. My apology, weak and infufficient as it was, however, met with a kind reception.
“ One or two concefficns (faid she agreeably) “ and your peace is made.—No referves for the future.—Give me the pleafure of your com-“ pany at every ieiture interval, and let your eS-teciTi, yottf friendship, be mine.”
I would have returned a Suitable compliment; but she prevented me.—We are friends, now, “ (relumed she) — and all past negledls shall be “ funk in oblivion. — When did you fee your “ great and deferved favourite Mifs Kenning-“ ton? We three will be all the world to each “ other ; nor shall 'I be happy until we have had a meeting in order to unite us.”
Could any thing be more agreeable, more acceptable in our circumstances ? I cannot vifit at your houSe with cordial Satisfadiion.—My Lord’s confident looks Seem to reproach me with aiBing improperly; — nor ought I to behold him even
F 3	with
102 The H I S T O R Y of
with affeSIed toleration, though the price of friendlhip and happinefs.
At Mrs. Bateman’s we Ihall be perfe£Ily at our eafe; eSpecially if that good Mr. Shugburgh will be of our party.— For his fake alone have I any remaining charity for the mafculine gender, they So aptly refenible the beasts of prey,. Seeking whom they may devour.
I beg your pardon, my Sweet girl; the youth who possesses an extraordinary share of your ap-probation is of a very different Species.—But,, believe me, his friends are neither of them very harmlefs, notwithstanding the pretty colours they at prefent assume.
How stngularly am I circumstanced ? Lord Kennington intreats, and Lord Finly Sighs with much the fame fuccefs;— and yet, like Atalanta, I could grieve at the necessity of leaving the latter behind.
Never was man more engaging. — His heart =— was not made for me; therefore I need not trouble myfelf to diffedt it.
—A very likely story, truly, that this fame figure of mine should So far bewitch his fenfes, that rather than not obtain the favour of my hand, he should madly comply with the horrid institution of matrimony, and be yoked for life to So unsuitable a mate !
As it is imposhble for me to entertain fo preposterous an expedlation, I hope you will allow, I ought to avoid all intercourse with fo agreeable an objedl:. With Mr. Bradshaw, nay, with the earl of Kennington, my heart is Safe; but I am undone if I converfe too frequently with Lord Finly.
A
Miss S O M M E R V T L E. 103
A tale pleafes or difpleaSes, derives reputation or disreputation, in a great meaSure, from the place its relator holds in our estimation; and I can fenSibly feel the deference my treacherous ears are inclined to pay to all his arguments.— He is, indeed, my dear madam, a dangerous perfon, and shall be avoided, — We will feek and center all our felicity in our meeting, at Mrs. Bateman’s.
I am, &c.
LETTER XXIII.
Mifs Kennington to Mils Price.
A Most whimstcal Scene, my dear Patty, have I been engaged in.
My uncle, gay as a lark, was on the tip-toe of pleassng expediation all this morning, from having most luckily overlooked your cruel an-fwer to his generous epistle.
He fetched a violent compafs, in order to feel rny pulfe, “ Did I- love retirement? Was I ca-pable of renouncing the elupty pleafures of a “ city, for the latisfadiion of friendship-—Had “la true fenfe of gratitude, duty ; and did I “ poffefs a fingle Spark of benevolence ? There “ was no request he could deny me.—-Put him to “ the proofhalf his fortune ;'—a reconcilia-“ tion with his greatestenemy—a pilgrimage—
I was very fenSible of his motive for thefe fine profeffions, and deemed it justifiable to take him
F 4	in
104 The HISTORY of
in his own toils. It was an unpremeditated, but happy thought.
** Your Lordship is amazingly good, (faid I) ** to furnish me with So unhoped for an oppor-** tunity of communicating an humble wish.” But notwithstanding my request was the re> fuk of accident, his compliance with it was certainly predetermined, as an efSedlual bribe to win me to his purpofe.
I tremble at my own timidity, now it is over! though at the junSIure, I was furprizingly fup-ported. I, however, hesttated, and was unable to proceed.
Allons! (cried he)—Now’s your time:—
you have no difpleafure to apprehend--”
Thus encouraged, I ventured to lift up my eyes. You had a brother, fir, (refumed 1) he was my father ;—but not ray only parent.— ** How happy v/ould your Lordship render many ** hearts, by graciousty overlooking the only er-“ ror of his life! and Suffering his widow to receive the benefit of the living he enjoyed, the ** advowfon of which, by his deceafe, devolves to « your lordship.”
“ Your quickneSs and filial affedfion, (replied ** he, uncommonly elated, as if I had hit the very ** point) though against myfelf, 1 most highly approve.—My standish! be it as you defire; ** unleSs your mother, henceforth my acknow-** ledged relation, chufes to Sell her interest in it for a handfome gratuity. That point fhe ** and you must fettle. Thus do I reSign all right and title to her during her life.”
And now, Sally (putting the paper into my
hands)
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 105
hands) I hope I have Some claim to your indulgence ?—
At this instant the door opened, and Mr. Squib prefented him your unwelcome piece of Satire. You may conceive, that I removed myfelf instantly, from the double motive of avoiding a gathering storm, and Securing that independence for the best of mothers I never had the least pro-fpedl or idea, until that blessed moment, of obtaining.
My chief anxiety is now at an end. I never, Patty, felt one cruel effecl of dependence myfelf, unaggravated by the- recolle^ion, .that the tenderest relation I have upon, earth; is reduced to the Same miserable state.
Common calamities may be excluded when the world is shut out;—the.lofs of friends Supported by the reste£Uon, that a day of reunion awaits us; nay, the bed of SickneSs, Smoothed by the hand of a hireling, /st. nurfe, when the sheltering roof is the. Sufferer’s property ;—but dependence comprehends whatever the thought can reach :—The foul is compelled to put on ~ trammels, and assume inclinations foreign to its own.,dictates, at the fame time that it is labouring to fuppreSs thoSe that are genuine : nor does the talk end here.—The lips must impart the ill-dissembled language;—the eyes, the every feature, lend their assistance to cover the deceit, whilst the Self-confli6l is hardly Sustained;—and. the breast is torn by unutterable anguish.
Mr. Shugburgh met me in the lobby, .as. I was bearing off my prize.—Lglweiyou.joy, ** my good girl (Said he).’’
F 5	,	You
io6 The HISTORY of
‘‘ You have overheard us, then fir; have I “ not reafon to rejoice ?”
No, child ; (replied he) my information extends not beyond that pretty countenance; the stniles and graces with which it is now “ overfpread, are too unufual to efcape obferva-“ tion.—VShy are you not as happy as deferv-ing of happinefs ? But may I alk you the caufe
Favour me only, fir, (returned I) with one half hour’s converfation, and 1 will conceal nothing from you.”
How the benevolent creature was delighted and astonished! I did not expofe his Lordship’s bafe view ; therefore, in the overflowings of this valuable friend’s partiality, I had the merit of ef-fedling this extraordinary bufinefs by the force of my very amiable and irrefistible acccmplilh-ments.
I was fenfible the moment I beheld you, “ (faid he) that my Lord’s heart must be fuMu-ed: there is no withstanding fuch perfuafive lovelinefs.— He has, indeed, a few foibles ** that obfcure the virtues of his character; but his nature, you find, is neither obdurate nor unrelenting.”
I affeQed to acquiefce with this worthy man’s fentiment, and honoured the double mistake his own gocdnefs led him into, refpediing Lord Ken-nington’s virtue, and his niece’s lovely perfuafton\ and, giving him the paper, begged he would endeavour to meet with an early and Safe opportunity of conveying it to England.	j
It will pay an exprefs, (faid the good manjil we cannot too Soon relieve a fuffering mind; « I will about it instantly.”
My
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 107
My Lord’s bell was now rung in that peculiar manner that befpeaks petulance or fury.—I was not without my apprehenssons ;—but bow were they encreaSed when a Servant informed me that I was the perfon rung for I
According to Marmontel, however, my mother fupported me.
Oh, my mother!—It is her caufe, and I will not forfake it! — My courage again failed me, when I reached the door of the apartment.— Away, timidity ! my mother’s deliverance from dependence is at stake; and she shall find, that on Such an occaston, her daughter is a heroine!
My Lord was meastiring the room with dif-compofed steps.—Could you have pitied him ?
“ Any commands for me, fir,” (demanded I, with the utmost humility).
He bit his lips.—<< You have taken care of that paper ?” faid he.
“ Undoubtedly, my Lord ; I confidered it as too great a treafure for me to poffefs; and “ therefore—”
What has the fool (k>ne ?”—cried he pettishly. “ I put it into Mr. Shugburgh’s hands, “ (replied the poor Sarah) who thinks he can ** never Sufficiently extol Such noble generofity !” “ You have been very hasty ; (Said he) but ** no matter.—I beg it may go no further at prefent.”
“ I am Sorry (returned I, with amazing cout rage) it is not in my power to oblige your Lordship; but Mr. Shugburgh left me imme-“ diately on receiving it, in order to diSpatch it by an exprefs; and I imagine, by this time,— He rubbed his forehead, endeavoured to force a Smile.—“ Your zeal is both natural and com-
mendable;
}
loS	The HISTORY of
mendable ; (Said he) but harkee ! you Sally [ “ I beg 1 may tell it my own way to Lady Sa-rah.”
Depend upon it, fir, (replied I, with the utmost compliance, as I found the tempest was flying away) I will never mention it to any one without your permiflion.” (A mental reservation in favour of you, Patty, by whofe means I have obtained it.)
What a foul the man must have !—How do I defpife—but Soft, my pen I my dear good father was his brother I He, it is true, funk the re-latioii.—I will, nevertheless, Spare him; therefore must conclude.
Yours, as ufual,
S.. Kennington.
LETTER XXIV.
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
qTIL L harping upon my daughter ! and fo ^ Harry, you are determined to perfist in the ridiculous notion of my being in love.
To be Sure, as you fay, it would be an ugly bufinefi, if I was to fufler my inclinations to be engaged by no-body knows who, on fo flight an acquaintance too.
But what is all this fame, that you make Such a bustle about ? or what avails the longest intimacy with a beloved object ? I thought you had known that the blind can distinguish no more
of
Miss S O M M E R V I LE. 109
of the Sun in Seven Succeeding years than one ssn-gle instant.—I could name you Several perSons in your neighbourhood, who took as much time and pains to be deceived in the diSpcsttions of their choSen brides, as you could destre,—one, four ; a Second, fix ; and a third, by much the wiSest of them all, full fourteen winters:—yet never were there greater dupes; never were pairs So unequally matched.
The cauSe, I acknowledge, is obScure, and may, without offence to your wiSdom, have eScaped your observation.—Attend, therefore, the unravelling.
In a ssngle state, both male andTemale have one and the Same point in view,—pleaSing each other. For this they drefs, they study, they chat,, they viSit.—An agreeable objedl strikes our fancies ; a thouSand and a thouSand beauties are discovered at every renewed interview :—the ladies affe6l to hide :—it is our bustnels boldly to Seek occastons of drawing them out.—The invention is exerciSed ;—the expedlation kept alive ; and the whole Scene is bufy and delightful.
At least', this is the cafe, where delicacy and fenstbility are not wanting.
With the inffpid, the interested, &c. &c. matters are othervviSe cond'udied ; the friends of the one, the conveniencies of the other, stimulating the union.
That unhappineSs should reSult from Hstleff-nels or SelfishneSs, is by no means Surpristng ; but how shall we account for its being equally the lot of the judicious and Sentimental.
This, Harry, I apprehend to be the cauSe.
The bustnefs at an end, a dead calm Succeeds;
no The HISTORY of
ceeds; affecHon still glows in the heart, but the shew of it eeaSes.
Distance and referve is exchanged for honest familiarity; and duty ufurps the place of voluntary kindnefs.
The man purfues his occupation with renewed vigour -his better half will be benefited no lefs than himfelf.
But madam fees things with very different eyes.—And can you leave me for fo long a period ; unmindful of my amufement; unmindful of my capacity for amufing—My perfon—my conversation, are their charms diminished ?— Alas I what gainer am I by renouncing the whole, world for you !
He Sooths, he flatters her for a time ; but the fame dull tale, the fame fenfelefs complaints, are fo frequently repeated, that at length, his home becomes utterly distasteful to him ; which, by a different behaviour and apleafing variety, would have been his highest happinesh
You tell me I argue upon wrong principles, when I give understanding to Such a mate ;—but, believe me, 'Harry, your Senfible women are the hardest to deal with of any upon earth, as they really merit much ; but require a homage that human nature cannot pay.
I love the Sex, their pretty faces ;-their
happy language;—their genuine wit, their agreeable vivacity, all, all have their due weight in my estimation :—but I cannot digest the peculiarities they are fubjefit to.
The workings of children’s fancies how delightful ! their little finesse — their variablenefs of temper, their love of power, their impatience of controul, I have frequently amufed myfelf
whole
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. hi
whole hours in observing:—nay, I can Some times divert my fell with the whimSical and mifchie-vous tricks of a monkey ;—but, for the foul of me, I cannot patiently tolerate the feafon of discretion in either the one or the other.
Miis Kennington and Mifs Price, as being freer from folly than the generality of their fex, are high in my good graces; but Paris’s talk was an eafy one,, in compariibn of what I should experience, if they were to become competitors for any prize in my arbitration.
Mifs Kennington and Mifs Price have been the beginning and end of all my epistles Since my acquaintance with them; but read them over once again, and tell me which of them fills up the largest Space ?—Then, if you can, per-fist in your infidelity ; for I am refolved to honour no more nonfenSe with my notice.
Mrs. Bateman is for ever at my Lord Ken-nington’s.—Something, I am perfuaded, is in the wind. It is true he has Served her upon an occaSion of the utmost confequence to her interest ;—but I think her gratitude is overstrained. —I must get footing at her houSe, or all will not be well.
Apropos.—There she goes for the Park ;— a-lone too : your pardon Harry ; but the opportunity is too precious to be lost.
# ^ %
Just returned ; the walk was pleaSant; the conversation highly important.
This widow is one of your very good-natured, your very obliging women, who, from not committing
112 The history of
mitting vice themfelves, have it the more in their power to missead the unwary.
I am Sorry; no, I am very glad Patty Price has made Such an acquaintance; (he will have an opportunity of Seeing a great deal of the world at her houfe ; and I, perhaps, be enabled to dif-cover her real inclinations.
Am I not a bufy, friendly fellow, to keep fuch a sharp look out for the unthankful; for 1 dare believe Lord Finly is So thoroughly perfuaded I am his rival, that there is no fervice I could render him that w'ould be acceptable.
You are Satisfied with my eonducl, it feems, refpefllng Bob^—That’s my good boy; your heart is not avaricioufly bent; nor have you any objection to receiving a girl of merit into your family, notwithstanding she will be a dead weight upon your estate.
But I believe we must get you to carry your generofity a little farther, and make overtures to my Lord ; for I am So gay, and your brother fo bashful,-—that what the one could fay would be disregarded, whilst the other would be incapable of opening his lips.
—Defend me, I fay, from your Soft entan--glements.
Morn..
Lord Finly is in the dumps ; and, according to Bob’s wife Sentiments, not without reafcn. What felf-tormentors thefe love-fick mortals are !
Mrs. Bateman, overcome by my eloquence the other morning, promifed to gWe me an in* vitation whenever Patty Price w'as to be next at her hcufe; and, like a woman of honour, yef-
terday-
s.
Miss SOMMER VILE. T15
terday-noon Sent me a card : Mifs Kennington was likewife to be of the party. What a flame we should have had our young Spark in, if he had been worthy to receive that piece of information !—But your pardon, Bobby, (Said I “ mentally, when I read the particulars) I must “ not introduce you into Such dangerous com-pany.
“ You bold fellows, (Said Lord Finly, with sffumed gaiety) are never out of your way.
I cannot imagine how you brought this “ matter to bear, efpecially as we are negleft-“ ed ? — Could not you contrive to edge us in ?”
‘‘ Excufe me. Sir; (returned I) let every one ‘‘ thrive by his own abilities: If I have a brazen ‘‘ front, you have a tender heart; — and Bob,
« — why, faith, he has no heart at all.”
“ You exult. Sir ?” Said his Ample Lordship, with a carelefs felf-approving air. —Not I,
“ Sir; (returned your Bradshaw) I am only a Ht-tie merrily difpofed, and arn Sorry It does not « hit your humour. — If you,	"
mands, you may liltrust rtie; —^ I will faith-“ fully execute them.” Set a fox (Said the fly Bob) to watch the geefe. Hah, FiPly He is your Friend Mr. Fleetwood, (returrt-ed his Lordship most emphatically) or he would not be mine.”
Is not Lord Finly a very dignified perfonage ?
Ill -natured pleafure is not with me a natural feeling: —• I, however, experienced it upon this occaSion. — Down I fat, hummed a tune,
‘‘ Before I was in love, oh, every month was May 1” They trod on each other’s toe; — I arofe abruptly, — laughed, — put on. my Sword,
— took
U4 The H I S T O R Y of
— took a fide-view of myfelf in the glafs, . was perfedlly fatisfied, and Sallied forth.
But, shall I acknowledge it, Harry ; — fo far from fpending-rhe happy evening I expedled, I found the widow" alone, and in dishabille.
She rallied me unmercifully on the aukward figure I made upon the occaSion, and shewed me a card of excule the ladies had fent her. — That old wife coxcomb had detained them for his own amufement; and Finly was amply revenged,
for my idle gaiety.------I most certainly de-
ferved it, — was it my bufinefs, by officioufly intruding to interrupt their felicity.
I am, Harry, much yours,
F. Bradskw,
^ F T T E R XXV.
i
Lady Sarah Kennington to Mifs Turner. Dear Tur-ner.
T AUGH if you are wife^ shall be the motto I—* of this epistle; but how poorly shall I be capable of defcribing, by the dull tedious cha-rafters that fall from the pen, what deferves the utmost strength and glow of verbal repre-fentation.
The adventurer is detedled ; — her affeflati-on, her hypocrify expofed to public view : she
appears,
I
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 115
appears, I assure you, in no leSs a character than Mrs. Trueman’s journey-woman.
I own I was rather infefled with the ridiculous fancies of my company ; an inchanted castle, a dwarf,-----and distressed damfel, would. Some-
times, confufedly prefent themfetves to my imagination ; — but the milliner’s shop was beyond my utmost conception.
A crowd of carriages in Dartmouth-street op-poSing my passage, I was alarmed, and wished to alight; but, easting my eyes into a shop, appre-henSion foon gave place to exultation : there she fat, upon her throne, Surrounded with ribbons, and the whole frippery eye-traps for the vulgar, thefe inferior clafs of traders Spread to allure their inferior customers.
You have Seen her confuSed: — but this was neither your noble nor your Soft confuston; it aroSe from conScious meanneSs.
I am not callous; — a ray of pity stole upon my heart; but instantly reco!le<sting the state of Suffering She affedted to be cast into, by S
iyhead frolic, l yieioea to ine oiciates'br right reafon, and triumphed in her humiliation.
Well, this preposterous Scene was of short duration. — Home flew I: — she, perhaps, fought her miserable garret, to give the proud torrent vent, which was with difficulty restrained during my prefence.
My father’s horfes are in excellent caSe ; but could not keep pace with my wishes and imagination. — I related every particular about a rpillion of times in idea, between Dartmouth-street and College-green, — when, at length, I was enabled to revel in the adfual and delightful talk to an unhoped-for audience.
My
»
ii6 The HISTORY of
My Lord and Mr. Shugburgh dined at the Castle ; — Sarah and I, had been folitary companions, over a hastily-difpatch’d meal: — and I had no other expectation at my return, than finding her, in her uSual still-life, prepared to ssinper or v/eep, as occaSion rtlight require. Judge, then, of my agreeable Surprize, when the opening door prefentcd to my view the charming Bradshaw and inoffenstve Fleetwood.
I refolved to break my intelligence upon them all at once, intermixed with a due portion of fa-tire upon that fellow Frank, for betraying fiich chagrin at her abrupt departure. But as it is impostlble to write the staring eyes, gaping mouths, and agitating pashons of the faces 1 beheld, 1 will forbear giving you the cxprefs terms I made ufe of; let it Suffice till we meet> that I mortified them Sufficiently.
Bcb, half petrified with astonishment, loft the power of utterance ; — Sarah hung dowa her head in difconfolation; —- but Bradshaw, the C,	is hateful to ijisl
WHS lo da.'iiig as to profefs the highest approbation for her, even in he*- Sallen state, and entered into a warm odious difpute relative to the fit-nefs or unfitnefs cf bestowing any future countenance upon her.
I could not tolerate the wretch in his perverfe meanneSs, if my father was not as strangely infatuated ; for, notwithstanding the particulars I have mentioned, the low thing has had the artifice to impofe herfelf upon him, for a very worthy and consequential perScn,
What can lier pride and arrogance end In I **' Being kept, I hope; for, provided we- can but
waSn our hands of her, no niatter for the means.
An
- _’t	'
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 117
An odd conceit strikes me : — iS Mr. Gravity should have a month’s mind to her — you know what professions he made at the tavern from whence she fo genteelly strayed, — it would be excellent. Your Sailors are the best dupes in nature ; — and then he is Such a Sentimental blockhead, that her fpecioufnefs must work upon him.
I will erafe Cork from the globe that is now at my elbow; —- yet, unoffending city, thy plea is just ; the caufe that Separated Mifs Turner and me, not the place of her detention, is tlie proper objeft of my difgust : yet, be it as it may. So capricious is human nature, that I cannot be per-feSUy in charity even with thee, until she is restored to me.
Your Sister is not the thing: — gay and entertaining indeed ; — but without gall; — to laugh is the only joy she is capable of tasting. —— I allow it is a very eligible exerciSe of the mind; but is most delightful when agreeably contrasted. The brow that never knew a frown, was not formed to command: and your permanent grin is rather habitual than heart-felt.
I am, in all events, convinced that I shall have a very unfatisfa6lory time of it during your ab-Sence ; for my father’s houfe, that was wont to be the refort of the polite, and the feat of amufement, is now become a common receptacle for trumpery and rubbish ; — but depend upon it, I will not look tamely on for any considerable time: my rights and privileges shall either be restored to me, or I will bid adieu to Dublin, papa, and all papa’s preposterous favourites.
You and I will take a trip to England, shew away agreeably to our own inclinations. —.I
have
n8 The H I S T O R Y of
have a private hoard that will anfwer our pur. pofe; and we will most certainly give them the flip upon Suitable provocation.
I am, &c.
*	M	2	^	**	*	A	•
«.^««OC6O«‘^^*OdOO»'^^»OOOO**^$”OOOO”^'»0OOO“5^“OOOO”^‘«OOOO'»^*»Ol!)OO'»^'»O66O'>$^'»00Mf^=
$t:s:ss
LETTER XXVI.
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
YOU remember, Harry, the mortified (late your last accounts left me in; but m matter, we will no longer tread in Such trife Several days elapSed before my haughty refenl.) ment, refpefting Lady Sarah, began in any degree to fubfide ; — but, at length, I condefcend-ed, with great humility, to make the first ovei-ture for reviSiting at Lord Kennington’s.
You need not doubt Bob’s readineSs to coraplj with So agreeable a propofal. It was, indeed, with much difficulty that I had prevailed upoi him not to be outrageous at my abfenting myfel, notwithstanding I promifed, as foon as postib!e,tt refume my former condudt and complaifancefe his convenience.
But it is proper you should be made acquainted, in the first instance, with the pains I have talei to render myfelf Serviceable to this hot-headei Lord Finlv.
You well know my favourable Sentiments el
^_ •/	j
Patty Price; I was, however, almost wicte
enougi
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 119
enough to wish, for the fake of Bob’s friend, that fome circumstance might reach my knowledge of fuch a nature as to difengage his affections. You will allow, Harry, that there was more of bafenefs than love in this particular.
To this end, and in Spite of your wifdom, to this end alone, I refolved to make her a private viSit.
I found her when unadorned, adorned the mojl. — How often must I repeat, she is a charming creature!
She received me politely; I am indebted to Lady Sarah for this compliment.
That I have fome obligations to that lady I must acknowledge, as I obtained a piece of information from her, which you was fo cruel as to refufe me ; but could you conceive it possible to elude my vigilance ? —
Forgive, ssr, (faid she) if I interrupt you in order to fet you right, • with refpeD to me. I shall ever remember the indulgence of the company I was cast in on the other fide the water, with the utmost gratitude, notwith-“ standing I have dearly paid for it Since my ar-“ rival in Dublin. It is true I wished to conceal “ myfelf from the knowledge of all the gentle-men, as their gallantry could no longer be an' ‘‘ innocent amufement for me; and their very genteel treatment must, of courfe, terminate with my passage.”
“ That view, (continued she) was frustrated ; “ but I do hope lliat my Situation will not expofe me to any undue liberties. —My fenfe of pro-‘‘ priety is rather quickened than diminished by “ their converfation ; nor can I be eaSily impof-“ ed upon, either as to my own charaQer or
*	“ that
120 The history of
“ that of another’s. Kindnefs and civility will “ ever be grateful to me; but the language that exceeds thoSe limits I ought not to listen to. — A little shop-woman, no longer your fellow-“ traveller, — do not loSe fight of that circum-stance, and you and I, fir, shall be on proper terms.”
What intreaties did I not uSe in order to prevail upon her to forego her referve; •— she remained immoveable; — bewitching obfcinacy! it operated more strongly upon my foul than all her former conduQ.
Had you but Seen her lovely humility, her charming adherence to her worthy refolution ! — How irrefistibly she confined my behaviour and expreshons to the rules she thought fit to prescribe, — like me, you would have — but you are a Saucy rafeal; and may guefs my Sentiments.
I took my leave with the utmost refpeO:, and begged her to permit me to renew my viSit, even on her own hard conditions.
She politely intimated that it was requifite for her to be very tender of appearances; —- gentlemen were dangerous vifitors for a young woman fo critically fituated, — as the world was both an indefatigable and ill-natured obferver; — but fhe would rely upon my discretion.
Thus, you perceive, I was but very little the better for my wife Scheme. — V/hat meaSures Lord Finly means to purSue I know not; but I think it is pretty clear that he will be horribly disappointed.
I wish it was possible to learn who she really is ? — Discretion, modest reTerve and amiable humility, are the gifts of nature ; but an improved
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 122
proved understanding, refined taste, and elegant manners are, alone, the effedls of a genteel and judicious education.
I have no great faith in the marvellous in general ; but, in this particular, am more than half inclined to form great expeflations. SuppoSe
you was to enquire,--------her family cannot be
obfcure; or, if it is, what encouragement for young women to conduQ; themfelves with prudence. No perfon on earth is fo defpicable but may lift themfelves into confequenee by a due attention to propriety ; efpecially, K in poffesti-on of the Smallest portion of beauty or youth.
What a pretty lesson of instruflion could I, now deal out to a whole troop of females, destitute of provifion, and expofed to difficulties. Instead of over-dressing their not unengaging figures to be warpt by giddy vanity, and inviting that attention from us that is too commonly their bane; if, like Patty, — but neither my letters nor her example can be ufeful to them; as the one will be confined to your perufal, .the knowledge of the other to the fmall circle of her acquaintance.
I have miSerably digressed :---however, as I
told you in the beginning of my .letter, I dangled Bob to Lord Kennington’s, in order to throw my Self once more in Patty’s way, (that is really fomething beyond what I intended to communicate ; but let it pafs) not judging it convenient, (for I will finish my blundering Sentence) by too quick a return upon her in Dart-mouth-street, to exclude mySelf for ever from her fight.
My artifice, Harry, was not fuccefsful; we received, indeed, ah invitation for to-morrow
VoL. I.	G	evening
t
122 The history of
evening. « A Select party,” Said his Lordflilp
looking fignificantly.-1 am, therefore
tempted to conclude she will be there : if I am right, it will prove an agreeable viSit; other wife, what a Sacrifice of time to dullnefs, folly, and infipidity ?
---------- -----0— -------------^
LETTER XXVI.
Mifs Kennington to MiSs Carey.
FO R once, my dear Dolly, I have had the refolution to Suffer without complaint; but I fear my heroifm would have deferred me, if the calamity had been of much longer continuance : it is, however, happily past, an^ I now mention it merely for your amufe-ment.
Mr. Fleetwood had in a manner forfaken us, and the uneafinefs I endured is not to be deferib-ed. In what could I have offended him ? from whence his difgust ? was for ever the unavailing enquiry of my heart.
But this morning I was most agreeably fur-prized by his coming to our houfe with a countenance that befpoke the Softest, the kindest fen-timents; nor was his abfence, lam convinced,a voluntary one.
I ashed after Lord Finly, for Patty’s Sake. His grandfather was buried only last week, and he has not yet made himfelf public.
Miss SOMMERVILE 123
My uncle has shook off his chagrin, and Seems refolved to improve the hint Patty furnished him with, refpe6ling the letter ; I both honour and rejoice in his difcretion.
Lady Sarah affeQ;ed to look Scornfully upon Mr. Bradshaw; but he is blest with an eafy confidence and pleaSing vivacity that Soon charmed away her ill-humour.
Fleetwood was jostled at fo unfortunate a distance, as not to have it in his power to fay one tender thing. Speaking features on Such anoc-caSion are highly advantageous.
My uncle, in order to come at Lord Finly, whofe stridl obfervance of decency he had more than once thought proper to condemn, prepofed a private party for to-morrow evening.—None “ but friends (Said he) will be thereand, notwithstanding it may be inconststent for his Lord-Ihip to shew his face at the play-houfe, he can have no objedfion to .giving us his company.
The gentlemen promifed to ufe their interest with him, and took their leave Soon after.
My uncle was then pleafed to enter into the merits of Lord Finly’s charaCier and fortune, enjoining me to leave no art unpradUfed to hook him in. A very delicate attempt I must confeSs.
I long to fee Patty, to laugh over the trick she has put upon the old beau : — yet, I wish there may not be Some evil deSign couched under his feeming acquieScence.—I shall obferve, if possible, to counterwork all his steps.
What a bufy life I lead ! — I am an arrant Spy. — Now Self, now friendship is predomi-
G 2	nant.
J
124 The history of
nant, and my vigilance is equally exercifed the one as the other.
I hope Patty will not be forgotten upon occasson ; for it was my Lord’s poSitive opin that she was ..qualified to participate polite tirement. I know not how to lay her in, would drop Something at dinner, by way of morandum You shall hear more of me morrow.
Mors
Imagine me now drawn forth to the bed vantage, traverfing the drawing-room, — rustling of Silks — Lady Sarah an elegant figi but Somewhat of the largest. My Lord K nington, your Servant — How I abhor unnatu Smells.— His Lordship is peculiarly high-fceni ,	to-day.
Mr. Shugburgh has all the hearty fubflani appearance of a country-gentleman. He is ■gainer by what my Lord deems want of polif for if his majesty wished to prevent his mofti veterate enemy with a galling picture of theeai plenty, and benevolence of this nation — let V Shugburgh be the model, and that wish wot be accomplished.
A coach! — The modesty of that rap tells ti it must be Patty. “ Blefs me ! (Said I) what “ pretty quaker you make! you are an excelki “ copyest of the Sober fedl!”
“ An accidental one, madam, (returned llif “ I had no defign to assume a falfe appeal
ance.”
“ Mifs Patty, (Said my Lord) is determine
not to shine with borrowed lustre, and dof
“ jiillio
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 125
«« jiiftice to nature, by permitting her to be view-
ed in her highest perfe^iion.”
It is plain, (returned the Smiling vShugbiirgh)
« that Patty piques herfelf rather upon her un-“ derStanchng than perfon; but nc one can charge “ her with neglecting the one, when she diS-“ plays the other.”
Lady Sarah’s countenance changed with indignation; but she was compelled to receive her modest'falute with Seeming approbation.
Another carriage whth Servants, in mourning!
—	nay, then, they are come all together, and my uncle will be Satisfied.
Patty blushed exceedingly when Lord Finly entered the room.—His eyes instantly met hers;
—	be bowed refpeCtfully, and, having returned the civilities of !;e company, drew his chair clofe to mine, in hopes to have had Some conver-fation with the good girl.
He was disappointed in his Scheme; for my worthy uncle never ceafed tormenting her with idle Speeches, from the double motive of gratifying his own inclinations, and favouring Lord Finly’s audrefs to me.
It was, upon the whole, a most perverfe and formal evening; yet, as being introductory to future happy interviews, might be fupported.
The gentlemen offered to fet Patty home, as, they had a vacant feat; my relation did not quite relish the propofal, from mean apprehenfions.
Patty urged the impropriety of her accepting fuch an honour ;—the debate ran high, when Mr. Shugburgh determined it tosher intire fa-lisfaction.
“ I will take her under my convoy (faid he.)
G 3	Lfet
126 The HISTORY OF ,
Let a coach be called ; my little friend caS ** have no obje6Iion.”	I
The perplexity of her countenance was in. stantly difpelled.—He took her hand, and bore her off triumphantly.
Lord Finly and Mr. Bradshaw could ill diges! their difappointment ; but prudence andneceffitj taught them refignation.	|
Good night Dolly ‘this morn began in hopcij —the eve declines! it droops! it dies 1 i
j
I
I
1
I
--------0-——-----------—II
i
LETTER XXIX.
Lady Sarah Kennington to Mifs
Turner.
1
Lord Kennington has at length, my dear Mifs Turner, indulged his folly completely; | our drawing-room, fit for the reception of a polite emperor, was last night dedicated to the ignoble purpofe of entertaining a little shop-woman.
That mean creature Sarah, was in her element; mother’s own daughter, I fuppofe: yet the reflediion is unjust ; for, could she claim the earl of Kennington for her father, her grovelling fentiments would in that refpedi be unchanged, Mr. Bradshaw appeared to uncommon advantage -his deaths (though that merit might be his taylor’s) were elegant ; but. I’ll affure you, his behaviour was odiousty provoking. Mils Patty was the queen of the company,
and
Miss SOMMERVILE. 127
and received their homage with that affedled humility that ever covers artifice and prefumption.
My father lived but by her fide; Mr. Shug-burgh’s approbation of her was unbounded; Lord Finly was incapable of beholding any o-
ther objeQjT—and the handfomest,----though
most ridiculous fellow in the univerfe, appeared only ambitious of laying his heart at her feet.-— A comfortable Scene, you will fay, for a woman of my Spirit and feelings!
I Supported myfelf to a miracle: England ! England I and Mifs Turner I were the cordials I had recourfe to,.as occafion required.
Befides, you must understand I have formed a fcheme of undermining, their happinest.—I
will Set my father on fire:-he conceives his
fine niece to be the objedi of Lord Finly’s admiration ; (being, a pretty thing to admire) and will, I know on the least intimation of the contrary, be blown into a flame.
But I must proceed with caution ; for, should he fuSpedl my true motive, the lot would falL upon Jonas ; there would be no standing against his refentment; I propofej therefore. Swimming with the stream, and, by Seeming to giv,e into their meafures, totally diSconeert them.
Preston is not yet in charity with that wench for her complaint against Squib ; I shall have Her assistance upon every occafion to humble MiSs Patty ; nor has she received that great impression of the fweetnefs and goodneSs of Sarah’s
disposition, as might have been expedted.'-
The wife. Say the French, understand half a word.
Had your Sister been any other fort of woman than she is, she might hate been ufeful;—but
G 4	1 believe
128 The HISTORY of
i believe it will be most prudent to keep clear of Such a confidant; for my father is ail in all with her, for reafons, I fuppofe, you are unacquainted with.
She made us a short vifit yesterday morning; their behaviour was very mysterious; whifpers, nods, thanks, and promifes, were distinguifha-ble. i hope she will not, out of a profuSion of gratitude, become my mother-in-law.
I have lost my accustomed penetration. I . was at one period of my life, a most dangerous obferver. The remotest intimation, a frown, a Smile, nay a flirt of the fan, was Sufficient to put me upon the Scent; and I never failed to be Successful in my purSiiits..
But my faculties are impaired of late, info-much, that I have but one degree more fufcep-tibility than a down-right idiot. .
I do not make the application; but I was dipping into an author the other day, who told me “ That love is So whimSical a passion, that ** it inspires thofe with wit that never had any
before; and deprives thoSe of it, whc nfually
possessed it.”
The change in me is lingular;—but i am far from being an abfolute votary to the passion: *—mine is only a little kind of a Smattering inclination ;—though that, indeed, may be owing to the cold water Bradshaw was pleaSed to throw on it in its infancy.
Well, I have this comfort still, that if we cannot be friends, we will be enemies; and, if I am to be neglefbed and deSpifed, I will endeavour to render myfelf properly deServing. I am, S^c.
LET-
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 129
LETT E R XXX. :
MiSs Price to MiSs Kennington.
"rT T HY will you not, my dear madam^ > V V he convinced of the danger I expbfe myfelf to, in vifiting at your houfe ?—What I. fo much dreaded has come to paSs, encountering Lord Finly. Wlio can be infenSible to his merit ?—my heart, alas! is but too, too Sufceptible., How came you not to prepare me ? I had then avoided that treacherous confusson his Sudden appearance threw, me into. Did you, could he, perceive it ? If So, I am more than ever undone,;
You know how affiduous he was to Speak to me ; and it must be as evident that I made it my whole study to prevent his having an opportunity ; but it will be impostible to perfist in Such unnatural behaviour ; my curiostty, my inclination will certainly betray me; and the confe-quence must be fatal to my repoSe and conve- -nience..
I own I honour his Lordship exceedingly for. ' one part of his conduct; he is well acquainted with my Situation; no one need be at a lofs for. an . introdudbon at a public shop; yet he is So polite, fo generous as to affeft ignorance ^ of what he fuppofes I should have no pleafure in revealing :—What his views or intention may be, are beyond my utmost penetration.
Thou foolish girl,—instead of Seeking todif-
G..5 -	cover
130 The HISTORY of
cover the caufe, it is incumbent upon thee to SuppreSs the effeft: thy reputation depends upon an entire stop being put to every tender proceeding; and whatever it colls thee, that must be preferved.
It is too true, Mifs Kennington ; nor do I know any method fo probable or eligible, as your taking upon you to convince his Lordship how un-benefitting the distindUon he now honours me with, is to my circumstances; and I have no doubt but you would deliver me from every future mortification.
Mr. Bradshaw’s vifit would have been a fiif-ficient foundation for Scandal, if I had not been well known by the good woman I am now with,
After all, it is a misfortune that gentlemen will not confider the advantage and fatisfadiiom of thofe they profefs to admire: — but, no; the compliment of their admiration is a recompence for every evil ; the world’s cenfure, negled of friends, and the unhappy impreshon left upon a youthful heart.
Will you meet me on Tuefday at Mrs. Bateman’s ?—I.et us enjoy ourfelves for one day, and leave futurity to its own workings.
Lord Finly is much thinner than he was; or his drefs makes him appear fo—-What a noble countenance!
I am astonished that hecahdefcend to bestow any consideration on me, when So deferving, fo Suitable an objedf as Mifs Rennington is placed before him.
I will be honest; had I twenty thoufand pounds and Lord Finly not one shilling, (and his accomplishments the fame) I should think it
well
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 131
well laid out in the purchaSe of his heart; but, circumstanced as I now am, it would unSpeaka-bly rejoice me to fee my-friend united to Such merit and fortune,, as neither .the one nor the other is every day 'attainable.
You tell me my fineffe relative to your unde diverts you*; I am glad of it.
Had I flounced and bounced, as your over-virtuous ladies make a point of doing, on the flightest indignity, I must have entirely broke with your family ; instead of which his Lord- -ship is as gracious, tho’ rrot quite fb degagee as ufual, and our intercourse is highly agreeable > him.
Yet am I not a stupid wretch, to prefer the mean condition I was born in, to Splendor fo re-putably acquired?
It is.true, Patty, we have Seen how you have ' aded with refped to a propofal that could flat- -ter only your ambition; had your heart been touched, there had been a few. more words to the bargain.*
Hear me, madam; this was ever my opinion of prostitution, that the Soul has nothing to do with it: the fenfes once depraved, and all is over; , for the woman who is capable of loving a man for his perfon or estate, and merely to Secure the one or the other meets him at the altar, -knows no more of chastity than a Hottentot.
Let me intreat you once .more, to confider what can be done to deliver me from this dangerous state :—in the Second perfon we can fay abundance of things, much more to the purpofe than when the cafe is actually our own.
Feel for me, think for me; but, above all things continue me a place in. your affection and
friendship.
132	The HISTORY of
friendfhip, and you shall ever find me moil gratefully	Yours.
eooo oooc 4 eooo pooo 0006	0000 eooo 0000	0000
LETTER XXXI.
✓
From the Same to the Same.
SAVE, Save me, dear madam! from becoming a prey to the temptation that is now cast before me: ambition, vanity, felf-confide-ration, under the falfe colourings of love, moll powerfully agitate me. The offer of bafenefs requires only to be heard, to be refufed but fuch noble diSinterestednefs demands a return in fome meafure adequate.
Lord Finly by difdaining to diTguife his Sentiment, has taught me how I ought to a61; had his attachment been more extravagant, perhaps his fate had been lefs happy. Dazzled by the greatnefs of his generofity, my view might not have extended beyond the prefent moment, and when time had restored us both to refleflion, our peace hast been irreparably undone. This shop, that now fits So heavy upon his heart, shall'never prove a blot in his eScutcheon.—But, that my language may be intelligible to you, read the enclofed letter from his Lordship (which he fent to Mrs. Trueman’s immediately before his meeting me at your houSe, though she forgot to give it me until this morning) and favour me with your opinion of it.
Lord
Miss SOMMER VILE. 133
Lord Finly to Mils Price.
‘‘ Madam,
I BEG leave to assure you, with the ut-‘ most ssncerity, that I have the highest refpe6l: ‘‘ for the‘merits'of your charaQer; as a proof of which I will venture to lay my whole ‘‘ heart before you to be Scrutinized at your will.
“ When I first beheld you at Holyhead I was “ struck with your appearance; the beauty, the decency of your perfon, your language, your circumstances, all confpired to convey ** the most favourable impression of you to the « heart.
“ My heart not oply received but retained “ that impression: y^ur Subsequent converfati-** on, your Sentiment^, have abundantly impro-ved it; can you then be furprifed at its ope-rations ?
“ I will not deny but I flattered myfelf that your birth, agreeable to the idle judgment of the world, was little inferior to my own ; and “ refolved' that you alone should be the objefit “ of my purSuit and'tender approbation. You may remember I hinted Something of the kind to you at Holyhead ; but you commanded my ‘‘ Silence, and was obeyed.
‘‘ I hoped on our disembarkation, or, at least, “ as Soon as I had paid my last duties to my “ grand-father, to have informed myfelf of your family and connediions, when my ho-“ nourable intentions should have been made “ public ; for however Small your fortune, I
should
134 The H I S T O R Y of
“ should have been properly Senssble of the pre-Sent of your hand.
“ But how was I shocked to hear of your fi. “ tuation: indeed, my fweet girl; it was wrong “ to expofe yourfelf in a shop ; no creature can « behold you without Surprize and curioSity; and, consequently, will make that Surprize the Subjedt of their conversation, tv “ The endowments you poffefs, qualify you to shine in the higheft rank. I have not one ** apprehenSion of your not-acquitting yourfelf gracefully ; but 1 am So weak as to be hurt by the reproach of that shop and counter, be-‘‘ hind which you have fo unhappily placed ** yourfelf.
Quit, oh, I conjure.youj quit that hateful place!—put yourfelf under the*prote£lion of' Some friend you can confide in, and permit me “ to addrefs you, only by letter for one fix’ “ weeks, and theirconfent to live abroad and be-, come mine for ever.
That terrible mafeuline woman Lady Sax rah compels me to make this propofal ; shev would cruelly hunt you with Satire and ridi-i “ cule wherefoever you appeared ; and, in Spite-of my best endeavours to-promote, destroy “ your happinefs.
“ A few years travelling, change of climate, and increafe of age, would wear you out of. their knowledge; we would then return to “ England, and live agreeably to our own incli-nations.
“ How shall I perfuade you that it is m.erely “ for your peace-fake that I would banish myfelf “ from my native country. I have told you “ I am weak, I repeat the acknowledgement';
but
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 135
but my Sufceptibility of mortification, on this « occafion, could be only on your account,
‘‘ Many of your Sex are finely accomplilhed,
“ though born, nay bred obfcurely; and it is “ the priviledge of ours to communicate our “ dignity and confequence to the woman we eS-“ poufe : but perhaps you, from your great hu-« mility, would not So fufficiently attend to that particular, as would be uecefSary to your af-“ fuming a proper confidence where you was ‘‘ knowD..
“ I am Senfible oS your affediion for MiSs Kennington; nor do I wifh you to conceal “ my request from her ; she is not altogether ‘‘ exempt from difagreeable things, and, per-“ haps might confent to accompany us.
Do not misapprehend me, she loves Fleet-** wood.—A woman can never err when follow-“ ing her hushand’s fortune ; their union must “ be a previous step ; and the other, I think, would very naturally follow.
<< Weigh well, my dear creature! I beSeech “ you weigh well, all I have Said ;—and let your determination refult from reafon, from incli-** nation.
‘‘ If your affections are not already engaged ;	,
if you are not particularly prejudiced in my disfavour; if travelling is not hateful to you, and goodnefs no stranger to your bofom, you must, you shall be mine.
“ But renounce that shop; in all events it “ will be your bane. —-I should not be Surpri-fed if Some daring fellow was to carry yc u off violently. Was you as well acquainted with “ your own perfections as I am, you would tremble for your Safety, and joyfully accept
“ of
1
I
136 The HISTORY of
‘‘ of the friendship, tendernefs, and protefHon of a man who wishes to live no longer than “ he lives to your happinefs.
“ Be not difgijsted at the dullnejs or forma-iity of this epistle ; I have endeavoured to ‘‘ conform myfelf to that plainnefs and Sinceri-“ ty you fo much affedi; and, as a proof of my << deSire to pleafe you, will fupprefs every riling << fuggestion of love and tendernefs, and only fublcribe myfelf,
“ my dear Patty’s most affediionate,
“ fervant,	Finly.”^
Now, Mifs Kennington, I once , more beg your opinion:
The girl’s distradied to rejedf So extraordinary, fo unprecedented an offer.
—That’s the very objedlion, madam: the distance between Lord Fmly and Patty Price is fo immenfe, that it is impoffible' to unite them.
And yet how wretched .a creature I am, is not ift the power of words to defcribe !
I could have been contented with my humble’ fortune, performed the buSinefs of the day with pleafure, and found a comfortable repofe in the evening. — How dare I repine ! — What! — Is not the Being that made me, infinitely wife !
That ever a little fpecioufnefs of behaviour, as Lady Sarah justly stiled my pleafing arts, , should be capable of producing this!—but I have only to beg you will kindly write my fentiments for me; I never found rnyfest fo much at a lofs in my whole life.
My refolution is, however, fixed ; I will neither quit my milliner’s shop, nor marry Lord Finly. Some turn or other, may, perhaps, happen
*
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 137
i
pen in my favour.—May he be happy! we were not born for each other.
<
I am, &c.
t
LETTER XXXIL
Mifs Kennincton to Mifs Price.
UPON my word, Patty, I have no patience with you; — you refine until you are quite lost. Your interest and inclination So in~ tirely correspondent—yet you refolve to be miserable out of very obstinacy.
But do not deceive yourSelf; you are a£Ung upon a very wrong principle: the article of the shop operates more strongly upon your pride, than his Lordship’s generoiity upon your gra-, titude!
You have So much the advantage of me, in point of understanding, that I know not how to deal with you; but be assured I would Soon deliver any other perSon’s mind from Such ridiculous fetters.
Not marry him I you deServe to be beat for your folly and meanneSs!—a meanneSs far below whatever that shop or counter could reduce you to.
I will Say no more upon the Subjedi:; — only, madam, you will be pleaSed to do your dirty work yourSelf.—I am glad you are at a loSs for language to expoSe yourSelf. Take back your letter, and blush to know yourSelf the author of
Such
0
N.
13S The HISTORY of
Such egregious nonSenSe.—O wirdom ! wifdomf why didst thou forfake thy wonted favourite! Come to me diredlly, at all events;—bring fome little thing out of your poop to cover the deceit and let me endeavour not only to make you fen-stble of, but willing to renounce your far-stretched error. Not all the fnarling philofophers that ever existed would have thought of pradtiSing: fuch felf-denial;—but, take it from me, you are no heroine -you are only a mad-woman.
What would not Lady Sarah give for fuch an offer from Mr. Bradshaw, tho’ the cafe in her refpedl (at least during old Mr. Bradshaw’s life) would be entirely reverfed -she has the money, the man the merit.
A trip to France, Italy, or-even Germany — How does my heart bound at the bare idea of fuch a thing?—You, my dear girl, the companion of my happy journey ! — but my peace and happinefs are no concern of yours.— My uncle may fell me. Sacrifice me to the most horrible of wretches:—you can be a patient Spec-tator of my mifery ; nor would accept of the finest fortune and finest gentleman in Ireland, to Saveyourfelf and friend from destrudfion.
You must follow your own inventions, lofe the bestj the most valuable of opportunities, and figh out the remainder of your days in Sorrow and regret.
I am,.&c,
n E T-
Miss SOMMER VILE. 139
0
LETTER XXXIIL
From the Same to the Same.
WE are undone, Patty, nothing can Save us from the Severest calamity.
What a careleSs stupid wretch !—though, indeed,- I meant it for the best.—Falfe keys may be procured ; but the pocket is Sacred, except from the hand of the thief.
Your letter, which in the gaiety of your heart you Sent me relative to my uncle’s wicked proposals, is gone,—lost;— perhaps, is fallen into his hands.—What will become of us—- if Lady Sarah has got it? —WorSe and worfe: I must fly my country for ever!	'
You fee, my dear, how necessary it was for you to have made a proper uSe of your understanding ; the fault is all my own, and I will not meanly divide it. Why did I not immediately burn So dangerous a paper, nor Suffer it to riSe up in judgment against me ? For you must know that I unfortunately transcribed my Lord’s letter to you on the back of it, before I complied with your request of laying it upon his toilet.
I have not the confidence to enquire after it; my voice, my countenance, cannot be trusted.
AdviSe me how to a6l; Some miSchief will be the conSequence,—and I can never forgive my-Self for being the author of it. Write to me by the bearer, and believe me to be
most affedfionately yours,
S. Kennington.
END of the FIR ST'VOLU ME.
THE
H I S T O R y
O F
MISS SOMMERVILE.
VOL. II.
LEW S C lil^iCldEJLA
THE
I8oi
•HISTORY
or
MISS SOMMERVILE.
/
Written by a Lady.
■h*.‘
I N T W O V O L U M E S.
VOL. II.
/
-'A-
<9.	.	0
?ND U S L I N:
Printed by D. Chaiv1berlaine» W. Sleator,
J. Potts, J, Williams, and C. Ingham.
M,DCC,LXIX.
THE.,
H I S T O R. V ■
OF
MISS SOMMERVILE.
'/ ,.
LETTER XXXI.
f
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
E L L, Harry, you have hitherto been I W I entertained with the lovelinefs, the ..§-.oooo...3|{.. worthiness of Patty Price: and, notwithstanding my heart was incapable of receiving a stmilar impression with Finly, I will now own to you that I approve her above all her fex, and prophanely conSider her as more than mortal; — but angels and women are a distinO; Species, and, however darknefs'or even twilight may deceive us, the fun in his meridian willre-veal the cheat.
The objedt of my approbation was a modest, fenSible, well-bred female, whofe virtues and ac-complifhments entitled her to my best esteem; — not a low vicious wretch, capable of being VoL. II.	H	captivated
A
146 The H I S T O R Y of
captivated by the allurements of fortune and blandishments of foppery,—the most contempt-ibie as well as unfeafona’ble of foppery,—that of old age.
Lord Finly will be mad with rage and difap-pointment; — but he shall be no longer duped, Sunk as she is to infamy; we will mutually def-piSe her. That ever fo miferable a creature as Lord Kennington could form or execute fo def. picable a deSign ; and his fine niece, whofe per-fedtions I fo pleaSingly employed mySelf in def-cribing, and had marked down for a wife for your truly worthy brother,—is neither more nor lefs than an abfolute pander to her uncle.
I little fufpedted that our engagement would have been produdtive of fuch a difcovery.
Lord Finly was referved, nay, melancholy the whole evening,—mortified, no doubt from being unable to approach the goddefs of his idolatry, who had fo artfully placed herfelf between her friends in iniquitv. Lord and Mifs Kennington, as to be inaccessible to every other perfon.
Never did the grand master of deceit—It is to no purpofe to dwell upon an unpleaSing fub-jedf. I have often told you what bewitching graces she is mistrefs of.
It w'as bv the merest accident on earth thatl obtained an evidence of her voluntary acceptance of the wages of fin, a tranfeript of which I now fend you, and must referve the original for future ufe.
We were informed that fupper was ready.— Rissng always cccafions feme little bustle,— which Bob (I am infinitely obliged to him) tooh advantage cf, and pressing clofe to Mifs Kennington thought himfelf completely happy.
She
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 147
She drew her handkerchief hastily from her pocket, in order to conceal her blushing, (for the Sweet dissembler that does not besstate to pro-niote and countenance guilt, affe6fs to be the stmplest, shyest thing) and out popt a piece of paper at the Same time.
I was at her elbow,—picked it up,—perceived the characters nearly refembling a little poem Patty had shewn me at Holyhead, that she had fele^ed from a favourite author; and was incited by a happy, tho’ perhaps mean, curlostty, to flip it into my pocket unobferved by any one: but, without further parade, read the fweet copy of her epistle to Mifs Kennington; as alfo my Lord’s vile propofal *.
Ought they to be permitted to enjoy their •wickednefs unmolested ?—No; she shall not im-pofe upon Bob, nor the world in general. — I will make her bafenefs as public as the day ; but not till I have privately reproached and punished her.
I will make her a Second viSit; timidity and refpe^ shall not accompany me: — I will by as deep-laid hypocrify as she herfelf can praCtife, draw her out to the utmost—when I will produce this proof of her infamy !—and strike her dumb for ever!
I am now, beyond meafure, convinced that wine may improve our enjoyments;—but vto-man! — woman! — totally destroy them.
I am, &c.
* Here the tranfcripts are given;
H 2	L E T-
L
148 The HISTORY of
LETTER XXXII.
Mifs Price to Mifs Kennington.
Your prophecy, my dear madam, relative to the mortifying confequence of the loft papers, is already aecomplifhed; — but be not concerned; the cruel cenSurers of our condud will be the greatest fufferers in the end. I have, indeed. Sustained a terrible shock ; — it may be ufeful to me hereafter, and I am perfectly fa-tisfied.
I was in my proper employment this morning, when I was told a gentleman destred to fpeak with me. My foolish heart was thrown into an unnecessary palpitation; — it was not Lord Fin-ly, but the daring Mr. Bradshaw.
His addrefs at first, though polite, was vifi-bly altered; affedtation and nature are widely different.
I have preSumed, madam, (Said he) to re-“ peat my vifit Somewhat earlier than you “ feerned to permit me ; but ladles are not al-ways to be understood literally.”
I was a good deal difpleafed ; — but refolved, if poshble, to conceal It.
“ I am Sorry, fir, (returned I gravely) that the vTeafons I urged to prevent your giving yourfelf this trouble, were not deemed fuffi-eknt:.:	but, however light they may weigh
“ in
r
MiSs S O M M E R V I L E. 149
« in your estimation, I still fee them with the << fame eyes.”------
That isj my dear madam, you are a nice « obferver of forms; but rather negligent of “ realities.”
“ I have always conSidered you as a gentle-“ man, Sir; —it is a comprehenSive charafiler ; “ —and must be uniform or” ——•
“ The gentleman, Mifs Price, (returned he, with an air that difpleafed me) and the peer “ are not exa£lly the fame thing;—and perhaps “ the one may be as incapable of pleafing you “ as the other of difpleastng; but this I can af-“ firm, that no right honourable coxcomb in “ the univerfe can feel a more lively or difin-terested passion for you than I do, though “ he may have gifts in his power I cannot be-“ stow.”
I confefs I do not understand you, fir. “ Plain, intelligent language — not riddle or my’’stery, are Suited to my capacity,”
“ As a proof of my willingnefs to oblige you, “ madam, I will come to the pnrpofe. That I love you (nay do not interrupt me) is as true “ as that I exist —tenderly, ardently love you.
My perfonal merits you are no stranger to: “ my heart shall be modelled to your wish ; why, “ then, withhold yourfetf from me? — Accept “ my hand, my fortune, and make me happy. “ I v/ould not have offended you by this abrupt “ declaration, if I did not apprehend Some ri-“ valship in your affefitions. Confent to be “ mine;”-------
Be assured, fir, that, notwithstanding, it is irnpossible for me to accept your offer”—^—
“ Oh dear Mifs Patty! (with a kind of half
H 3	“ sheer)
1^0 The history of
Sneer) do not trouble yourSelf to invent un* meaning excufes; I know you better than you imagine, and am convinced my propofal is not unworthy of you.”
“ If it is your intention to mortify or diftrefs me, (Said I, in accents that must Speak my ** feelings) it is completely anSwered ; but pray, ** Sir, is not this conduct inconsistent no lefs with humanity than politenefs: I am a poor, de-
« fenceleSs, abjeQ: thing.”--
,	“ Upon my word, madam, (cried he eagerly)
you are an admirable creature!—What por-“ ers do you poffefs !—The world is deprived of “ a most excellent tragedian by that beautiful referve, that exquistte modesty, nature has bestowed upon you !”
“ I will hear no more; I beg, str, you will ** remove yourSelf from my Sight, without re-ducing me to the necefSity of expostng both you and myfelf.”
“ Expofe 1 — no, no, madam 1 (pray be feat-ed) you are too wife to expofe yourfelf velun-** tarily ; but if an accident Ihould happen to ** Ihew you in your true colours, I fuppofe you would not deny your own hand-writing. “ Why, really, mifs Patty, (continued he, with “ a Sarcastic Smile) all this rage and turmoil is very unnecessary: — a few words are alone Sufficient to clear up the matter.—.Can you, will you perssst in your assumed obstinacy, « and refufe an offer many of your fex (without ** vanity) would gladly embrace ?”
(Never can I forget his confident and cruelly Satirical countenance.)
Come, come, (faid he) I mean not the leaft violence j—only you shall not leave this room:
Miss S O M M K R V I L E. 151
t( —a change of chair, indeed, if one is a “ greater favourite with you than another, I v/ili ‘‘ not difpute; but I, will be heard, and anfvverr ed too, before we part.’’ ' .
Paffion^ moi,rtifiGation, Self-pity vvere too powerful; I burst into tears, and was nodels inca^ pable than unwilling to reply to fuch unmerited language.
He, for a few moments, beheld me with tender compastion; —but the turbulent fpirit by which he was a^uated brohj? put a Second, time.
‘‘ Treacherous fpol! (exclairped he, with a “ vehemence that startled me)-—-rny ovva,.heart, “ I mean, madam !n—This, love is a most diabo-“ lical buSinefs!—Now could I almost distrust my own fenfes l-r^admire, believe you as much “ as ever!-—but \yith So undeniable an evidence “ of your wW«r, in my pppket,-the imposstion cannot be digested.’’ . ,
“ I think, fir, (faid I) confidering the treat-ment I have m,et with? it is top cbndefcending even to tell you, you are grofsly abufed. There is not an adlion of my life that I should ‘‘ blush to, acknowledge: pay, a fettled purpoSe of my heart, that could make me asham-
I shall be mad 1—-but I am curedmadam, **' (cried he, affe^ing compofurc) it is not of “ the least confequence to me; — (adding with “ no fmall alteration both pf voice and counte.-“ nance) f only wish I had never feen your face; « — yet it will be of ufe to, me, —as .the re-“ membrance. must defend me; from all future “ hypocrify.’’ .	,	,	,
V Since you are So very genteel (faid I, half ** trembling with apprehenston and refentment)
H 4	y* a s
15'2 triN H I S T O R Y OF
** as to compel me to listen to your converfation, will you give me leavei Sir, to alk in turn, ** what evidence you may be possessed of to mt difadvantage	‘
■ Only^ this .letter- {returned 'he, with an ln-fiilfing affy--! preSu-rrie you know the Super-fcriptidii, and liiay, perhaps', recolledl the contents without my assistance.”
I immediately recognized my ow’n hand-writing; but had no furpicion that it vvas the only opportunity he-could have had oS Seeing me unworthily : I, therefore very eompoSedly Said, You will pleaSe to indulge me with a ssght of the date, at least,—as I have wrote too many letters to that Lady for it to be possible forme to conjediure which of them that may be.”
"Why, madam, (Said he, with a mixture of Scorn and ex'ultatiou) but I beg your pardon, « — you are a nominal lady, have a fnbjiantid ** coach and Jixand, for the reP:fhdijs Kenning-** ton and you can fettle	fits !—-you are,
“ indeed, a heroine 1 Lord Finly shall know how deServing you are of his best regard,-— ** and the heart-wounded Fleetwood be made ** acquainted with MiSs Kennington’s worth.— << Now I think it is but natural that you should ** lay astde your state.—i-The favours you confer ** upon his Lordship are abundantly too precious ** for him alone.—Admit me to a participation, ** and you shall find me all love, gratitude, and ** Secrecy. 1 will deliver up this letter,—leave « every one undeceived,—and contrive a place ** of audience for you moreSuitable to your tasse ** than your prefent one. I cannot she happy without you ; for 1, as well as the contempti-ble Lord Kennington, am fenfible that you
“ are
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 153
are one of the fairefl daughters of the creation!
What fays my lovely girl ? Thofe lips*---”
I shudder at the recolle^ion of his infolence! -*-He kissed me more than once before 1 had either . prefence of mind or strength to difengage myfelf:
‘‘ I thank you. Sir, (faid I, the instant I was able to Speak) you have wiped away my tears!
« —I shall be no lofer by being deprived of your good opinion. As to your SuSpicions of me,
** let them live for ever; but do not harbour one with regard to poor .Mifs Kennington :
** however culpable I am, she is perfedlly iano** cent.”
“ A likely story; indeed ; streturned he, con*
“ temptuoussy)—butfay, my beloved girl, (his “ features Softened) could you— (then, with rage and irritation) Oh-, you never could con-“ vihce me I have‘injured you I”
** To anfwer you (Said I) woulst be to destroy my fixed purpofei Whatever T am to Lord ** Kennington, be assured I' wilt always remain a stranger to you.^ Accufe me, expofe me, I ^ “ wilt not murmur: you may, perhaps, essen*
“ tially Serve a man whb possesses my highest “ esteem. I hope you will not longer detain “^me.”
“ Promife, then, (cried he. Seizing my hand, c “ which 1 ventured to withdraw, in the fame “ moment) that you will not hrdeyourfelf from “ my knowledge ; — guilty or innocent I niust ** visst you,—Do not make-'me deSperate Ino “ place on earth shall conceal you long!—I “ have resolution ; and what I engage to* do,
“ shall not be done by halves.”
H 5	y Only
154 The HISTORY of
“ Only leave me, for the prefent, (I was, my “ dear Mds Kennington terrified at his behavi* “ our) and I will conssder of all you have laid: “ I have little or no acquaintance in the coun-try, no friend to receive or protect me; you “ need no', therefore, apprehend my efcaping: « - -nay, if you are fo determined, and enter-pr zirg as you mention, it would be a folly “ to attempt fuch a thing.”
“ Give me, once more, your dear hand, and “ tell me now—Pardon my impetuossty it is not my natural difpolition; but you have un-** done me, and will be both unjust to yourfelf “ ard me, if you condemn my behaviour.” What a creature is man! —but I leave you to comment—My Spirits, my patience, are exhausted!—Was It for this I became a wanderer ?
My whole ccncern is for you: Mr. Fleet-wood will, undoubtedly, imbibe a fatal preju-dice against you : —I can fee no means of preventing it; you must Judge for yourfelf.
I am your unhappy
M.P.
LETTER XXXlIi.
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
IT Have dene her bustnefs, Harrv, with Lord Finly : poor man, the stroke was fevere. It ieems he had choSen her for the companion of
his
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 155-
his' future days; she is, however, found out, and. must rest content with being the old beau’s mistrefs.
Bob stghs most profoundly :^-shis heart rebels against his judgrnent. How difficult to perfuade ourfelves that a fair face only covers a corrupt mind.
It is propofed on all hands, that we should de-' fist vifiting at Kennington’s; but it is pretty plain that no one is fo great a hero as to Set the example. As for my part, I do not Scruple to aclcnowledge, that I neither can nor will forego the fight of Patty, So long gs she remains within my reach,
3 will watch her every step ;-~it will be employment for me ; that’s all, Harry. As to love, if ever I felt the least glimmering of the pasti-on, it is entirely conquered, o . What a fine fellow Finly was a few days ago! >—Disappointment is a hard lesson with him be knows nothing of philofophy, and deServes my commiseration. ’
Patty and her despicable gallant must have fothe JhouSe of reSort; —and shall I Suffer a fuper-anuated wretch to engroSs the loveliest creature breathing ? No; I will punish his prefumption, ; and teach him humility. <
This fellow knew the fejt,—-was vigorous in his attack,^—did not stand Sneaking with distant reSpedl;—but truly, the fear of offending the lady’s delicacy, has been the bane of — Finly’s felicity.
The affair would never have tranSpired, but by Such an accident as the dropt letter.- My Lord and his niece would have been faithful to
their
156	TstE HI STORY OF
their .truSt, and thefe worthy lads still continued the prey of a ridiculous passion.
I would give a hundred pounds that Bob was as fairly releafed, frorn his entanglement, as I froni my'foolisti approbation; but he has had the addrefs to excufe his belovdd at her uncle’s expence, —-she is fo inexperienced in vice, that he most certainly impofes upon her, with professing that he is,either privately married to Mist Patty, or intends fo to be.—A pretty device, as Well as a most probable one. As to me, T def-pife fuch shallow artifice.—Though nothing a(-fedts me shore' than the knowledge of Patty’s bafenefs,—yet my heart cannot fubfcribe to any paultry deceptions. I will, however, have fuch proof as shall confound her in Spite of her effrontery, and compel her, when next we meeh to acknowledge the Justice of rny accufation.
Perhaps you asst to what purpofe?—why not leave her , to her fate, ,aUd return to England ? — That were a good joke, indeed. We have not been a month in the country, and you want us to fly upon fuch a trumpery girl’s account: but, fo far from that, Harry, I shall perfuade Bob and Finly to behave ak ufual.—They may, perhaps, pick up intelligence ;—but I will not behold her face again in my own proper charaifter, for Some time. I may, perhaps, caufe it to be
inssnuated that I am gone into the country.
(
^ ^
. -»
They have given into my meafures, especially as they w'ill bring Some notable purpofe of Finly’s to b?ar.
I was hot always fo curious;—but I would give
a hand-
i
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 157
a handSome See at this junfture to be let even into that little Secret.
What a generous fellow theSe ladies will think me, for not betraying them.—-I must laugh by anticipationthey shall find me as fkilful a manager as themfelves- They have a volatility in their natures that allures oiie into the opinion, that they cannot be deep defignersbut it is a grofs error, which I was born to deteft. I will write my fweet a6trefs a farewel epistle : it will have^a bee.
Adieu, Harry ; — you perceive the wound is not mortal;nor will it leave even a trifling fear.
X
LETTER XXXIV.
Mr. Bradshaw to Mifs Price.
\
Madam,
I Sincerely pity your fallen condition, you certainly deferved a better fate ; but if hap-pinefs is not incompatible with vice, may you obtain it.
I am no profligate; and notwithstanding the offenstve propofals I made you, knowing your circumstances, I would not for ten thoufand worlds have been your Seducer. You have, indeed, robbed yourfelf of an unfpeakable charm i —I am far from wishing to mortify you ; but a
cha-
158 The history of
chara6ler, as you took occafion to remark to me, ought to be uniform.
Had your mind, in reality, been untainted,— how amiably engaging the condu6l you obfervedl I am astonished you did not perSeyere in virtue from very policy ; you have fixed one friend by your renunciation of it;—but you have forfeited an honourable and honest attachment.
I confefs I leave town in order to avoid the fight of you.—I could not be your enemy, notwithstanding your cruelty, and your fecret ilill remains at your own door. The stightest encouragement would have prevented my departure ; the stightest encouragement would enfure my return. ConSider the whole affair, madam, and should you not esteem me utterly unworthy of you, recal me to that felicity I can nevor enjoy at a distance from fo beloved an objo6V.
I am, Sic.
LETTER XXXV.
I
Lord Finly to Mifs Price.
PARDON me, dear madam, if I am impatient to know your determination. I did flatter myfelf that you would have honoured my letter in a greater degree than you have done; but I fubmit to your pleaSure, and only intreat that you will, at length, relieve me from my painful fulpence.
Tell me, Oh 1 tell me, if my request is agreeable
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 159
able to your inclinations; nor delay your compliance with it, if not utterly repugnant: you are only increassng your own difficulties. You are but little known at preSent in this kingdom; —retire before it is too late to anfwer our puj-pofe.
I doubt not but you have taken Mifs Kenning-ton’s advice upon the occafion. Deal fincerely by me; is she not my friend ? She is all good-nefs! and will not only approve my choice, but be my advocate.
I will not attempt to wait upon you without your permission ; but let the constraint have Some Small merit in your stght. — Self-denial is by no means the eassest talk we impofe upon our-felves. I will fend to-morrow for your anfwer; it will be a miferable period until I am acquainted with the refult of my application.
I am, &c.
LETTER XXXVI.
Mifs Price to Lord Finly.
My L0RD9
IT is your Lordship’s destre that I should be very explicit in my anfwer to your generous, your obliging letter: I take you at your word.—-Read, then, with attention what I now lay before you.
That I am fenSible of ytiur merit I will not fcruple to acknowledge; and had my fortune
taught
t6q The' H I S T O R'N of
taught me to entertain fuch great expeflations as the Securing your affe6Iions, Should have deemed myfelf a happy being:—but, as I am circumstanced, I can -only regret the mifery of having a taste of’refinement that never can be
gratified.
At Holyhead-my retirement fat eafy upon me, noohad I one wiSh beyond a Safe passage to this city. The impertinence of a Set of people I never offended, drove me from my hiding-place; —I fought protection, but have been betrayed to nibrtification.
I have no charge against you, my Lord, but that m unexampled goodnefs andicondeScenficn. Infirlt,'however grievous, the mind can Support; it is< roufed by ill-treatment to felf-defence; —. but Sinks into inadivity and < depression when tempted beyond its strength.
Be assured it is neither your fortune or title that I lament the loSs of; your greatnefs of foul could alone have reached my heart.
If I was capable.of receiving your future ad-dreffes, I should not make this confession ; but I love you too well to unite you to So inconSidera-ble a mortal as I am.
Mr. Bradshaw has thought proper to uSe me unworthily, on a Supposstion that I am, as he calls me, a hypocrite.—But how comes it, Since , my hypocriSy has never injured him, that he is authorised to make me So Severely Smart for it ?
He accuSes me of being kept by Lord Ken-nington. If is really Singular that your men of understanding can be So groSsIy impoSed upon.
' My Situation is unchanged ;—my me^n employment unrenounced; — what’advantage had I then reaped by forfeiting my virtue ?
—But
Miss \ SOM M E R V I L E. 161
—But I shall not labour the point; I may af-tonish you ; but it is the duty we owe to posterity rather than ourSelves, that should restrain us from prostitution; and this duty extends to both Sexes.
It is, my Lord, an unworthy a6fion to rob our ndghbour of his fame, his friends, or property ; and do we not start at the bare idea of
bringing harmlefs creatures into existence, without one claim to parental protefl;ion, provifion, or confanguinity ? But this is not all: the better half of the odium falls upon their innocent heads, whilst the giiilty authors of their Sufferings revel, at large, in that affluence from which they are for ever excluded.
I do not mention this on your Lordship’s account ; but to convince you that the woman that can look fo far into confequences,; must be the most defpicable of wretches, if capable of offending against Such strong eonvidfions.
Believe me, fir, I am unconcerned at my own particular part of the Scandal; but it hurts me unspeakably, that a lady of the nicest Sentiments should be fo unjustly cenfured. If I am criminal, Mifs Kennington is totally ignorant of it; nor would she join hands with guilt to obtain the greatest of rewards.
But to return to your Lordship’s noble gene-roSity.
Had I never Set my foot in this kingdom, had my acquaintance with you commenced under very different aufpices, I could never have confent-ed to difgrace you by fuch an alliance; but,, buffeted about as I have been, traduced, infnlted, was I mean enough to ifly with your Lordship,— you ought to Spurn the reptile.
A
i62	The H I S T O R Y or
A little reflexion will teach you to Subfchbe to this opinion.—Be Satisfied, I am not the fine creature you mistake meSor: it is alone the want of a better knowledge of me, that deceives you; but I, that know myfelf will Secure you from prafibical error.
May your Lordship make a more Suitable choice: may the lady really posteSs every per-fe6fion imputed to me, with a heart as well diS-poSed to love and honour you, andi you cannot fail of happineSs.
Mr. Bradshaw writes me word he has left Dublin on my account.
I am Sorry he should have given himfelf So much trouble; for, if he had condefcended to intimate his intention, or the necessity there was for removing himfelf to a distance from So formidable a being, I mySelf would have withdrawn. All places are alike to the friendlefs, Ireland, Scotland, England ; misfortunes would alike await me; but in every place I should remain,	my Lord,
Your Lordship’s, &c.
LETTER XXXVII.
Mifs Price to Mifs Rennington.
I Send you, my dear madam, this Second letter from Lord Finly-r-I have returned an an-Iwer, and all is at an end. But really my Situation,
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 163
lion begins, to be very uneaSy to me. Some one or other perpetually dropping in to teaze and torment me.
Lady Sarah brought two or three ladies yef-terday, to whom (he had related my adventures, as she was pleafed to stile them.
They did me the honour to stare and laugh me out of countenance. When will my perie-cutions ceafe ?
^ ^ ^
How every appearance of evil drives us to defpairl My fpirits were So funk, by Lady Sarah’s behaviour, that I gave myfelf over for lost. —When the agreeable Mrs, fiateman instantly prefented herfelf;
« You Seem chagrined, my dear, (Said she) « what has befallen you? I would be your friend << in every refpe6l:, if you would but confide in “ me.”
I thought it a folly to conceal the cauSe of my mortification from her.
She kindly pitied me, and advifed me to take a private lodging, and have my work Sent home. “ There are many perfons in Dublin, (Said she) would be glad to receive you upon the footing of a boarder or companion.—Myfelf, for in-stance: I know not when my fister will re-“ turn. You should difpofe of your time as “ you pleafed, except an hour or two in the “ evening, when we would contrive, if possible, to have Mifs Kennington with us.”
I was So harrasted by the prefent, and appre-henfive of the future, that I was half inclined to
accept
i64 The H I S T O R Y of
accept this very kind offer, I, however, refol-ved to be determined by you; therefore, mak-ing a proper return to So much good nature, I begged she would allow me a few days to coiir Sider of it, and I would then fend her my an-fwer.
What neceflities am I reduced to by the cruelty of mankind!—Why will they not permit me to pafs my hours in peace ? But I will look forward to that feafon that will Secure me from all interruption,—the winter of life.
Which of them, then, would be willing to chear my drooping Spirits ? Refledfion, (if I was either fo weak or fo wlelced as' to yield to their .perfuassons) guilty refleDipn, would, at that period, be the only bitter companion of my Solitude!^— I have it as yet, thank heaven,, in my power to avoid fo dreadful a fate !
Surely this new profpe6t will not be.obfcu-
red.——
Mr. Bradshaw has conveyed himSelf off. He has Sent a faucy kind of a penitential letter; you shall fee it when we meet.
I rejoice in his departure, whatever were his motives. There was Something fo wild and daring in his countenance, the last time I Saw him, that I think of him with terror !
I have Seen more of the world in thefe lad three months of my life, than I could have' imagined the world afforded, jealoufy, deceit, villainy, cruelty.—Oh, my dear Mifs Kennington, continue your kindnefs to me, or I must be lost!
I beg that none of thefe gentlemen may be acquainted with my new Situation; for which real'on Lady Sarah must not be let into the Scent.
Her
Miss S O MM ER V I L E. 165
Her woman, I am SenSible, owes me a dreadful fpite ; but, perhaps, her malice may never ,hav.e an opportunity of shewing itfelf. I wonder she has never had the boldnefs to intercept our letters.
What shall I do in this exigence. I ha\c more than once wished it was poshble to put myfelf under the protedlion of honest Mr. Shug-burgh.—We will talk the matter over at Mrs, Bateman’s, till when, adieu.
Morn.
If I had difpatched this letter, previous to my receiving the enclofed, I should have fufpedled it was your work; but I am now convinced it is a true pidlure of benevolence and humanity.
Mr. Shugburgh to Mifs Price.
‘‘ IT is So impossible to have an opportunity « of fpeaking to my dear little girl, when fur-rounded by her admirers, that I am obliged to “ have recourfe to my pen, or confine my wish-es and fentiments to my own breast. Wri-“ ting is an employment I am but little pradli-“ fed in, as my conneSlions are very limited.— “ I have, indeed, a heart at all times open to the participation of my neighbour’s pleafures and diffatisfaftions; but my only Sphere of “ aftivity is Lord Kennington’s family.
“ There is a Something in your expofed fitu-“ ation that affedls me extremely. What can be “ the meaning, my dear child, that you are thus “ strolled from the protedtion of your relations “ or friends ? Is it possible that, contrary to all appearance and bHief, you can have been guil-
“ ty
166 The HISTORY of
ty of any steps to forfeit their countenance ; or “ has misfortune alone driven you to thefe ex-“ tremities ?
“ I know too much both of life and human nature to be furprifed at either caufe.—Error « and mortality were never disunited; nor is “ there any eminence above the reach of ca-lamity.
But, in order to be properly Serviceable “ to you, it is necessary to understand your true “ cafe. You can have nothing to apprehend from me.—I am no fenfual wretch I no Spoiler of innocence ! but would shelter even a blight-ed flower from further injury !
“ Refledt on my whole condudl towards you; have I not betrayed an almost paternal affec* tion ?—Make me ufeful to you in whatever way you judge most advantageous to your hap-pinefs; and I will never to fee you more, if “ you require it, as a proof of the uprightnefs of my intentions.
•r
“ I own it is hard that humility and industry “ cannot Secure you from cenfure and malevo-lence ; but the great endowments you possefs, both of body and mind, will never permit you ** to be free from interruption in a city.
Thofe young fellows, Lord Finly and Mr. Bradshaw, are not, I dare believe, either staves to appetite or void of principle ; but “ what can they propoSe by their mutual ap-probation of you ?
“ My friend too, I am Scandalized to think “ of it; but he is most shamefully taken in; you have much lefs, however to apprehend from venerable threefcore, than blocming five-and-lwenty.
Your
Miss SOMMERVILE. 167
“ Your Situation is too critical to be trifled with ; you must remove your preSent employ-ment, or your reputation will be lost.
I need not intimate that there are perSons ready and willing to aggravate every the least “ unfavourable circumstance—A malicious wo-man is worfe than the greatest libertine.—He has gratifications, hov/ever grofs, to incite him in his career ;—but malice, from whence is it derived ? or whether shall we trace it to ‘‘ the inmost recesses of a narrow foul, that, like << the dog in the manger, denies others the Sub-fistence it is incapable of feeding upon ?
“ I have cast about in my own mind for a proper afylum for you : till your bloom is fome-what overpast, your industrious inclination ‘‘ need not be fubdued. I do not wish to load “ you with obligation, but Secure you from “ evil.”
MiSs Kennington*s mother is a very good woman :—her fortune is now become pretty eafy ; but she is too prudent to fly in the face of her benefa<stors, by fnatching her daughter ** out of their hands.
“ To her you may be doubly recommended ; ‘‘ Mifs Kennington loves you, and would rejoice to Serve you. You will be an excellent com-panion for that lady ; and. by your pleafing “ vivacity, and the never failing assistance of time, in great m ashre difpel her preSent me-lancholv. I will prcteS her child in return for the favour she may shew you; but your “ own good fenfe vvll enlure your happinefs and “ her approbation,
“ Let me hear froiii you Soon, and believe ‘‘ me 10 be,	&c.
Shugburgh.”
I shall
i68 The HISTOR Y ot
I shall perhaps, make a strange figure in your eyes, by declining an offer that was confeffedly the only thing I most defired. But, my dear MiSs Kenpington, you have hitherto indulged me in the retention of Some Secrets you conceive me poffeffed of relative to my affairs; and I muft intreat you not to withdraw it at this jundlure. It is impoffible for me to return to England with convenience, and Mrs. Bateman’s Scheme cannot be exceptionable. I beg you will nevertheless, make Mr. Shugburgh Senfible of my grateful Surprize at fuch unmerited goodnefs, and assure him, that if he or you disapprove of the difpofition I mean to make of myfelf, I v/ill implicitly fubfcribe to your opinion, and forego its execution.
Believe me, I am far from being averfe to obligation, (however ineligible in itfelf) when conferred by fuch minds as the worthy Mr. Shug-burgffs and your own ; but I must, at the fame time, acknowledge that Mrs. Bateman’s proposal of having my work conveyed to her houfe, has charms for me, as I have many enemies forward to misconstrue every adiion that would tend to raife me about my prefent condition.
I have had many hard lines Set before me; but none have been more difficult to acquire, than refufing the request of friendship.
I am an unhappy creature !—-yet do not listen to me-I am most happy in your valuable e-steem and the kind consideration of that best of men; nor dare I repine at little events that have oppofed my idle inclination.	I am, &c.
h E T-
I
Miss ,S O M M E R V I L E. 169
X X	X,’*^*\X, ••^'§ §**li** X,'*2i” X,"^'* X "SS" X
IT fs •	^	%	• IT ^	U m fr	• %F %; m	^	5	/	Z ^
LETTER XXXVIII.
From the Same to the Same.
HOW Sweetly, my dear madam, do you chide me and the worthy Mr. Shugburgh [ How flattering his friendly condemnation! Whatever was the natural propenSity of my heart, I Surely could not fail to conduQ; myfelf properly, protedled and exhorted by So much goodnefs.
I have, in conformity to your permission and approbation, wrote my refolution to Mrs, Bateman, who returned me a polite anfwer, and promifed to fetch me in the evening. With her I shall be as retired as my heart can wish ; and at her houfe I shall hope for the pleafure of frequently feeing the best and most beloved friends I have upon earth.
I have no doubt of our agreement; she is both a well-bred and a well-natured woman, and must be incapable of exadling any compliances I ought to refufe.
I am impatient to be gone.—Lord Finly—but no more of him; I have taken my final leave, and shall only remain his private friend. May he forget me, if necessary to his repofe. May the world’s amufements and the fatisfadfion of friendship Sooth his heart and may he Soon make a more judicious and happy choice. Oh, nature ! oh, vanity ! how cruelly rebellious 1—But
VoL. II.	I	it
i7o The H I S T O R Y of
it is only the Same thing as heretofore, and fhitl be Subdued.
LETTER XXXIX,
The Same to the Same.
I Am, my dear MiSs Kennington, perfefily delighted with my new fituation ; a more obliging or good humoured woman never lived. She prevents my wilhes; and, in order to relieve my mind from every apprehenSion of obligation, has kindly fet me to work her a fire-fcreen that will at least be adequate to a three-' month’s, board.
She confessed ■ to me, last-night, that fhe had a visst from Mr. Shugburgh.— What a valuable man!—he (poke of me with his ufual generossty! complimented her (to be Sure) upon her attachment to me; but begged she would not deprive him of the pleafure of being my private benefactor. ^
“ You know, madam, (Said he) that lam “ a man without connections,,as it were: my fortune is eafy in itfelf; but asT am sstuated “ at prefent, becomes abundant. I must, there-fore, intreat your permission to dedicate a fmall “ portion of it to Patty’s ufe. I would not con-“ traCt, but enlarge your fystem of benevolence; “ you must be the best judge in what manner .to employ it, and let her happinefs still conti-“ nue to be the objeCt of your attention.”
A kind
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 171
A kind of amicable Squabble was the confe-quence of this unexpected propofal; and Mrs. Bateman, at last, brought him to confent that I Ihould remain her visst or for one twelve-months without making himfelf a party. She told me this in the utmost confidence ; stut will it be poS-fible, my dear, to restrain my gratitude! — May I never forfeit So inestimable a friend!
1 hope Lord Finly is reconciled to my departure :—it was abrupt, but could not be avoided. To have made him acquainted with my intention, would have been indireClly to afk him to prevent the execution of it.;—and, believe me, whatever tender regret I may have experienced upon the occaSion, it is amply compenfated by the reflection, that I have afted justly.
It is to very little purpofe that we profeSs to love or honour an objeCl, unlefs our aCtions are properly correfpondent; and I am daily shocked at the proceedings of both fexes in the particular instance, of uniting themfelves to each other at all adventures. Poverty, distrefs, contumely,
in vain rear their heads:—the hardv lovers rush
•/
on to known destruction, when, like our first parents, though equally culpable, they would throw the blame off themfelves, however griev-oufly they load their lately beloved.—We females are not well-fuited to rough blasts; — the rofes fade upon the cheek; the voice loSes its harmony; and the stern brow of the new-made lord is but ill calculated to recall them to life and beauty.—^^Thus the better half (in every fenfe of the word) of their days is fpent in bitter repentance of a step they would not shun, and are unable to retrieve.
It is, however, no eafy talk to fubdue and restrain our most prevailing inclination.
I z	Rejoice
1)2 The HISTORY of
Rejoice, my dear Mlfs Kennington! rejoice with me, that the confli£l is over ! for I feel I should be unequal to Such another trial.
«
LETTER XL.
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
TH E plot, my good Harry, begins to thicken ; Patty has eloped; and, if you would believe the fine milliner and her dependants, without any one’s knowledge, privity, or confent.
I have, undoubtedly, a Something of extravagant credulity in my afpeft, or they would never have attempted to impofe Such a tale upon me.
She has, you must know, written herfelf out in most heroic characters to Finly, by way of anfwer to his ridiculous propofals: — she is a li-' nished creature,, and will not fail of her crowd of dupes wherefoever she appears.
If I had not been So lucky as to obtain that fine letter, to proclaim her iniquity, she had never been fo daring as to give up appearances; but all her game was out, and she had nothing for it, but to retire to that old wretch’s prettj boufey gardens, and delightful Jhades.
They shall not, however, afford her all the fatisfadion she may promife herfelf; for I will haunt her as her evil genius, and most grievouf-ly torment her.
Finly
Miss so MM ER VILE. 175
Finly is afhamed to confefs his weaknels; but I can perceive there is much more of companion than anger in his refentment.—I wish he was fairly out of the country.
Bob begs you will not delay your kind intentions relative to him : he has great faith in your fuccefs; but I am far from being fo clear in it. Lord Kennington has an equal share of ambition and vanity, and would ill-brook forfeiting his hopes of uniting his niece to nobility.
They fpent the afternoon there previous to Patty’s elopement: Kennington threw out many broad hints to Lord Finly, who made but an aukward figure upon the occafion> according to Bob’s account; and for the pair of turtles, as Finly tells the story, it was most pitiable;—they did fo hang down their heads in Sorrow and dif-confolation.
For my part, I am in minutely expedlation of a rupture: none but the wilfully blind, one would imagine, could overlook fuch Speaking behaviour; but my Lord’s optics are So whim-fically constru6led that he fees but fo much of an objeD, and in Such a point of view, as Suits his own humour or fancy —yet, to expe£t it ^ can continue, is to be as abfurd as himfelf.
Lady Sarah is wonderfully altered in her dif-poSition ; fo complaifant, fo complying, and fo uncommonly attentive to Mifs Kennington.—-It is not for me to pry into futurity; but I wish she means her well, or us either; many a throat has been cut under the mafk of friendship, and I have not the least doubt of her abilities in the mifchievous.
This Patty fits heavy upon my heart, in fplte of all my efforts; — it is curiofity; it is friend-
I 3	ship;
174 The H I S T O R Y of
, fBip;—it is a defire of convincing her that flie is not So private in her bafenefs as she may fla{. ter herfelf, that thus agitates me : but find her out I must, or I can never rest.
I’ll tell you, Harry, I am not without appre. henfion that I myfelf have been aceestary to her flight. I did not treat her properly: no ill con-du£t on her part could authoriv:e me to take lir berties: — and she has certainly flown from Lord Finly in order to fly from me her perfc-cutor.
If there should be any mistake in that affair — but, blockhead that I am, was it not her own hand-writing! nor does she merit the confidera-tion of a momen 11
I am, &c.
Bradshaw.
----------------o---------------
I
LETTER XLI,
Lord Finly to MiSs Kennington. Madam,
I Have great reafon to believe you are not unacquainted with the place of Patty’s refi-dence. To fay it would oblige me to convey the enclofed Safely to her hands, would poorly exprefs the happinefs I should derive from fueh a favour.
But I have much more to alk; she is accufed of a criminal conneflion with a near relation of
yours; I need not mention the reft. I own the
pr oofs
Miss S O M M E R-V IE E. 1^5
proofs are strong against her, yet my heart is unconvinced.
A letter to you upon a horrid SubjeQ:, tho’unquestionably her writing, is insufficient to deprive her of that estimation her whole behaviour Seemed to demand.
Much more depends upon this article than you can possibly imagine. I must Submit, however, to your pleafure ; —- yet you are too humane to trifle with mifery, yow have the power of relieving.	^
lam, &c.
f;	:	I	!	> f	*	*	;	{	‘ I S
I s s	I 8 S	t	i i 2. s i 2	2	2	;	1	2	2 i
LETTER XLIL
Mifs Price to Mifs Kennington.
H.D W unfriendly, my dear madam, the ceremony you have obferved ? — Could you conceive that any Secrets fubsssted betw'een Lord Finly and me, that you might not participate ?
He is a generous man,? but interrupts the hap-pinefs he Seeks to promote.
I will not oppofe your complying with his request, as it is a happy opportunity of acquitting yourfelf to Mr. Fleetwood, — who must have been strangely puzzled in bis judgment of us, notwithstanding his affefited ignorance deprived you oS every means of introducing the fubjeft, without betraying your knowledge of all my proceedings.
I 4	Do,
*
176' The HISTORY of
Do, My dear madam, intreat him, for my peace-fake, to forbear all future application. —
I cannot be his, though to refufe him breaks my very heart.
It would have been kind to have Saved me the trouble of fending the enclofed, and waiting for your opinion of it, by peruSing it; in the firft instance, what Seals ought to be Sacred from friendship’s hand ? My Spirits are fe low, that I can only add, that I am, M. Price,
Lord Finly to MiSs Price:
(EncloSed in the above.)
« FORGIVE me, madam, that I thus perSift « to follow you even to your utmost retirement;
but,the interest I have in your reputation and << happineSs will not permit me to fit down con* tent with injuries done the one, and my appre-lienfions for the other.
** Did you but know how they have tortured me — but you are Virtue’s Self, and must bid « defiance to their cenfures.
“ Let me intreat you to condeScend to explain one circumstance — Teach me but to un-“ ravel it agreeable to my wishes, and you will deliver me from the greatest hor-“ rors!
“ What can all this mean ? If you are merely the perfon you give yourSelf for, and capable of descending to the improprieties imputed ** to you, why your cruel preference of Lord ** Kennington to me ? I would have Saved you ** from every miserable conSequence of infamy. “ Affluence should have dwelt with you, and “ the voice of reflsdion been totally stopt.
You
MiSs S O M M E R VI L E. .
« Nbu should not have been under the necefli-“ ty of flying the world, to avoid its cenfures ;
“ the worlds approbation should have been at “ your command, unlefs wilfully forfeited by . “ any outrage against appearances.
“ But it was not a guilty conne61ion I fought “ with you ; the amiable qualifications you pof-“ felTed. —^^Oh ! it never can be that you are “ contaminated. — You conceal yourfelf equal-“ ly from that fellow as from me; and you “ have not been long enough^ in Dublin to be : “ feduced.<
“ Patty, my beloved Patty ! what language “ can I ufe to prevail upon you to be just to “ yourfelf and generous to me ? Only clear up “ the fuSpicions of my friends; I want no new “ proofs of your merit; and put the fcheme I “ propofed into execution. I cannot live with-“-out you ! furely you will not Sacrifice a life to “ idle Scruples.
“ I do not afk any further account of you “ than Mifs Kennington can give reSpedling one “, particular: —be it your biifinefs only to com-“ municate the happy information,; that you “ confent to be mine. ■ The world’s opinion has “ no weight with me.— Vice I most certainly “ abjure ; but the refle61ions - of the envious I “ know how to defpife 1 and shall always re«. “ main, .
FlfiLYo
I
I $	L E IV
/
178 The HISTORY op
LETTER XLIII.
Mifs Price to MiSs Kennington.
IArri greatly dlfcompoSed by what has happened; we are never leSs fecure than when we have no apprehenSion of danger.
Mrs. Bateman and I had Scarcely dined before a coach stopt at the door: she appeared confufed, and haflily withdrew; — for my part I had no fufpicion, consequently felt no alarm until she returned with affefted parade, introducing your fine uncle, the venerable earl of Kennington.
— I was both piqued and Surprized. —“ This is the most unexpected favour (Said the ill dif-<< fembler); I thought your Lordship had been out of town.”
And this is the most unexpefted rencounter, (returned his Lordship, refpe£tfully bowing to me) the lady on earth I could have moft wished, but least hoped to meet.”
I am forry, my Lord, (Said I) you should “ refurae a language, at this junCture, you had fo lately renounced, from a conviftion of its impropriety. I am exaCtly the fame Patty “ Price that was permitted, upon Sufferance, to “ viSit at your houfe ; and I believe Lord Ken-“ nington never gave a greater instance of con-
def-
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 179
« defcenSion on any occaSion, than in permitting his niece to countenance her.”
What a Sweet, perverfe girl it is, Mrs.
« Bateman I (exclaimed he in his odd manner)
« but Surely, she is not incorrigible; a better aquaintance with herSelf and friends will teach her to See things in a different light. — How “ long, pray, have you and Mrs. Bateman been on Such good terms ?”
You may Spare your enquiry, fir, (faid I, " rather fretfully ; for I was piqued at the inci-dent) whilst 1 am prefent, at least; I doubt not but you will find an. opportunity”—
— To pay my devoirs to you (returned he)depend upon it, my fair creature! no “ opportunity shall eScap^e me: you will know “ how entirely my heart is Subdued!” '
** This is very extraordinary ! (faid I, with a view to fet- him once more right.) It is not ‘‘ many days Since 1 Spent an evening at Lord << Kennington’s'; his Lordship was then gay and poUte> but perfeQly rational; nor did he attempt to affront me with unmeaning adu- ■ '^‘Tation.”
** Mrs. Bateman, Said he, hastily) I haust beg “ of you to retire : Some little affairs require ** fettling between this lady and me, that will ‘‘ not bear a witnefs. I am a man of honour “ — and expefit to be obliged :— be assured it will occaSion no enmity.”
My Lord is not a formidable -obje«9:,—and and it would have been the height of folly, in my Situation to oppqfe his request. Mrs. Bateman therefore curtSied, and withdrew.
** It is time for us, my dear girl; (Said your ** relation) to come to an explanation ; you have
“ ufed
/
i8o The HISTORY of
‘‘ ufed me ungeneroufly; and what is still ‘‘ worfe, affronted my understanding.
Your fineffe (continued he) with refpeff to the letter; I could pardon, if it had been prac-tifed upon a man of fefs experience than my-felf; but the bare SuppoSition that fo poor a «« deception could pafs with me, is never to be forgiven. As to expoSing me to my niece, << making her the conveyancer (if not infpeftor)
«« of your pretty reply, can even that be defend-‘‘ ed ? and, I doubt not but your little fatyrical hearts mauled me in private.”
“ It is cruel my Lord, for the mighty to op. prefs the weak !” —
“ Opprefs 1” — Come, come, Patty, (faid he, endeavouring to take my "hand) let me ** have no whining ; I now demand a verbal an-fwer to the propofal that audacious villain was fo hardy as to make you : he is my very inti-mate friend, and a conquest, I must tell you, “ of feme importance.”
You are fenSible, str, (replied I) I am under feme obligations to your family ; but that’s out of the c|uestion : it is not in my nature to give offence to any one, if it eoul'd be avoid-ed. — But, if you compel me to fpeak my fentiments”—
« O my dear Mifs 1 (twirling his hand) Speak, fpeak then, but literally, and I am “ content.”
Then, Sir, your letter v/as not more de-testable to me the first moment I received it' “ than at this jumflure ; nor can my opinion of it change.”
‘‘ Patty Price, (faid he, with great stgnifi-cance) look on me. —• How long have you
been
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. i8i
“ been under abje6i: circumstances. — If either “ caprice or misfortune has reduced you to the state I find you in, I have done; — but if you “ was born to labour, you cannot rejedi my propofals.’^
I must take the liberty of telling your Lord-ship, (returned I with Some warmth) your judgment is erroneous; honesty is but an “ humbler name for honour, and thoufands of ‘‘ the meanest condition are as happy enthu-“ Siasts to the one, as everyday proves Some “ of the greatest are to the other.”
“ Mere cant; (cried he, sheering) the conSe-“ quence of low-breeding. I never till this in-stant really fufpeQ;ed you to be poorly born. You have, nevertheless, Seen but little of life, or you would be fenfible that what you call “ vice, and make Such a horrible bustle about, “ is the very essence of gallantry and charadle-“ ristic of gentility. But I perceive that Mr. Shugburgh has been tampering with you, who, becaufe his constitution had been cooled “ in the falt-water, would deprive his friend of his best enjoyments. But I have a word more for your confideration; you fee how Mrs. Bateman lives; do you give into the fame amufements; your appearance, your expences shall not be inferior to hers, and by her alone “ shall they be fupported. I will never viSit at her houfe, claim your acquaintance in public, nor in my most unguarded moments, boast of a Single favour. Only let us fix upon fome “ Snug retreat for our interviews, which shall ■ be regulated and restrained by your inclina-tion.”
<< It
i82 The: HISTORY oe»
I can hear no more ; (it was Surely time to “ fly out.) What can encourage you thus groff-, « ly to aflFront me! — the poor prefumption of your fuperiority ; ■— but know, — yet to un-deceive you, would be to gratify and indulge your impertinent curioSity. And So it feems, “ my Lord, .your pride is mortified that a little tradefwoman should prefer, an agreeable inr duflry, to living with you upon the most dif-graceful terms; but,,believe me, there is very « little merit in reSisting what, cannot amount to a temptation.. If I must fall a prey to ** vice. Lord Kennington should not be .the-man.”—
“ No, madam,j(grinning malicious) not, perhaps « whilst the strutting Bradshaw was in the way; “ a formidable, rival, upon my honour ! — but I have no time for trifling ; 1 command here; “ and if you don’t think proper to relax fome-“ what of your feverity, — you must retuin « to your shop again, I think.”
« It is well, my Lord, (cried I difdainfully) ** and that shop will ever prove, an afylum to me « beyond the reach of your.utmost malice ; the “ mistrefs of it knows me from my infancy.? How the wretch was galled to hear I had one strong hold on earth !
« It is Simple, Patty, (faid he, in his moll “ infinuating way) to push things to Such extre-** mities. —■ I am warm and you are very pro-“ voking ; but you know your power. — It will “ be your own fault if a word of this tranfpires to Mrs, Bateman.«— A day or two’s cool “ refl efiion may be ufeful.”
Hear me, my Lord, — I will keep no dif-« honourable SecretsI would h&ve faid —
but
I
Miss SOMMERVILE. 183
but he was gone — and Mrs. Bateman retired to her apartment for the remainder of the day ; — she had not the confidence to encounter the dependant on her bounty. — So weak is guilt! So powerful is innocence !
I am Sorry, for the honour of my Sex, that Some circumftances refpeSIing me are rather Singular, as I am convinced I should have a6led upon the fame principles, let my birth or education have been ever fo low.—Thofe who have any true fenfe of virtue, would not forfake her paths for all the allurements and advantages vice could bestow. — The heart and head perfe6Uy correspond ; Sentiment, confirmed by reafon, and reafon improved by Sentiment;—nor is it necef-fary to be well-bred, or to possefs the finest understanding to make a proper ele6tion, where the mind is uncorrupted.
What a quantity I have wrote!—yet not one word of Lord Finly.—It is his dissatisfaflions a-lone that fit heavy upon me.—Tell me all you have Said and done !—Make but his peace, and you will restore my happinefs.
I am, SiC.
Price.
letter xliv.
Mifs Kensington to Mifs Carey. ,
HOW natural, Dolly, when any thing dif-gusts or offends us, to exclaim against the /	world;
i84 The HISTORY of
world; but, believe me, its inhabitants are a*^ lone the proper objefls of difgust.
For my owm part, I can fafely Say, I wifh “ I had been boin Some humble cottager ; and , never Seen life So great. So vain !”
One encouragement from my mother, and I -will fairly renounce thefe Splendid vicious Scenes.
I am So disturbed I cannot write cotreSUy : this Lord, this Lord, is the head, and I hope the tail of our family. This is. the matter.
Patty and I had enjoyed leveral happy interviews at Mrs, Bateman’s. We perfe6tly idolized the wretch for her goodnefs and humanity; the guilty alone are fufpicious; So that it is no refle(&ion upon us that our hearts glowed with grateful confidence.
I have, from time to time, defcribed her behaviour. Could you have fufpe6led she was merely a creature of my Lord’s, performing for hire the bafest and most unworthy buSinefs in nature ? I am called away.
*• * , * »
Nothing but calamities! Lady Sarah and Mr. Shugburgh, I fuppofe by his Lordship’s management, dined abroad. Vexation and dlfplea-fure were vifible in his countenance.
He was not difpofed to eat himlelf, and but little confidered my appetite. “ Have you done ?” Said he, Snappishly. I bowed in con-fufion, and he ordered the cloth to be removed before I had half finished my meal.
“ A very pretty return, Mrs. Sarah, (Said he the moment he had an opportunity) you have “ been pleafed to make to all my kindnefs. —
Little
»	t
Miss SOMMERVILE. 185
Little did I SuSpe6I you was encouraging that “ watry-headed fellow to afpire to an alliance “ with my family, or I should have broke his “ meafures long ago. I fuppofe you know no-“ thing of his brother’s affronting me with pro-** pofals;—but I perceive it is your method, “ when you are ashamed of your condu6l, to “ wrap yourfelf up in a contemptuous Silence.” “ Be assured, my Lord, if I could reply to
“ your fatisfadfion--”
With your leave, madam, I will finish your << wife Speech for you.—If you could make it “ appear that you was neither ungrateful nor “ difobedient, you would not be at a lofs for a reply ; but you have a mean foul, and no « better things could be expedted from you.
You may, however, inform your Spark, by “ the very first opportunity, that I will never confent to the match, though you are in eve-ry fenfe of the word a beggar, except in your hateful confanguinity.
“ I know it would pleafe you, (reSumed he) to fend you back to your fine artful mother; “ for which reafon I shall not think of it.—You “ deferve punishment, and shall meet with it at “ my hands.
“ Lord Finly, (added he, with the utmost difpleafure) might have been yours, if you “ had had common fenfe;—you have made a noble preference. Take it from me, howe-ver, that you shall not chufe for yourfelf. —I have a man in my eye, and shall introduce “ him in a few days; he is prepared to encoun-ter a Sullen untradlable girl; therefore will ‘o neither be mortified nor difappointed : nor need you try any foolish experiments upon his
“ difpoSi-
■i26 The H I S T O R Y of-
‘‘ diSpoSition; for, Supported with my intereffy he knows not to retreat.”
The storm is now beginning to reach me, and most unfit am I to stand against it.- But whatever steps his Lordship may compel me to take, I defy him to make a wife of me without my own confent: we shall have a trial for it, and perhaps, in the end, the weakest may be found* the strongest..
I will borrow Some of Patty’s Spirit; she can brave the shafts of adverfity; nor am I Such a puny infecf as to be eafily beat down.
Do feel my mother’s pulfe, she was ever tender and indulgent; but I will not leave Patty behind; and, perhaps, she cannot be prevailed upon to receive a stranger; be you our advocate, and deliver us both from miferable persecution. I am, with due remembrances, most affet^ionately yours,
S. Kennington.
LETTER LXV.
Lady Sarah Kennington to Mifs Turner.
The hour,, my dear Mifs Turner, is at laft arrived, when the hateful Patty Price must pay for all her folly and preSumption. 1 own I have long cast about for a means of punishing her, without effe6b: her party was fo strong there was no getting at her; but accident has accomplished what a,rtifice could not reach.
Preston
Miss SOMMER VILE. 1S7
Preston and Squib, her mortal enemies,^ have made a match of it. I have an objection to married women about my perfon, and have, therefore, amicably discharged her,
She happened to have a relation newly arrived from Devonshire, whofe interest she wished to promote, consequently recommended her to my Service, She is a very decent,, a very pretty looking girl.
But do not conclude, that I am So distressed for a fubjedt as to defcenstto my attendants, un-lefs there was meaning in it. I would tell you, that as our family still rings with Patty Price’s perfedtions, this young woman shrewdly fuf-pedls she is very well acquainted with her, and I have engaged to procure her a.fight of her Ladyship.
It would be charming to come at her history:: there must be Something very extraordinary in it though, by this perSon’s behaviour; for she does not chufe to mention? particulars until she is Satisfied she is not mistaken,.
Your fister is fo infatuated as to harbour her at her houfe : I', it Seems, drove .her from her honest employment by a little gaiety of heart; and the wife Mrs. Bateman instantly received her ; but my father was at the bottom of that bufinefs.
We are to have a wedding; a great fellow; with a fortune as big as himfelf, has been captivated by our Sarah ; — but the dear foul is as av verfe to the amour, as her uncle is anxious for its termination. •—A dutiful creature she will prove, I dare believe !
Bob and Mr. Bradshaw are blown from our houfe by his Lordship’s difpleafure. The pulling
i88 The HISTORY OF
ling mortal had the audacity to get his brother in the West to propofe him for a hustand for our couSin.
You know his Lordstiip is warm ; but you can have no idea how he flamed upon this oc-caston.
He, indeed, took the hint of marrying her to Mr. Smith from me ; I plainly difcovered his af-fedlion for her ; nor shall his pretenSions be un-lupported.
I wish my father was half as much difgustesh with Dublin as I am ; not one happy day have I yet feen in it'; but I must be content. — Some lucky hit may, perhaps, change the face of things: victory. Turner, does not always run in the fame channel.
His Lordship long wished I would have beheld Mr. Smith with an eye of favour;—but, unfortunately for him, he did not pleafe my fancy.—I am a little nice, you know, or I can af-fure you Mifs Sarah had been overlooked ; but, rather than not be allied to me, he condefcends to take her.
Shugburgh is not of the council, as we are perfuaded he would dissent from our opinion ; but you are fenSible his power with my father is very limited, therefore, no bad confequence can refult from his knowledge of it in due fea-fon.
I have no news, no fubjedl for amufement; but am as dull as the dullest inhabitant of this foggy city; and can only add, that I will give you the earliest notice of whatever concerns us.
I am, &c.
S. Kennington.
LET-
Miss SOMMER VILE. 189
LETTER XLVI.
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
WE have, my dear boy, received our dlf-million from the earl’s in rather disgraceful terms, indeed ; but no matter, one friend still remains in the garrifon, nor do vve utterly defpair.
The humility of Bob’s fortune, excluSive of your bounty, and the narrownefs of Kenning-ton’s foul, preventing all belief of fuch furpri-stng generoSity, has thrown us out of our chance: add to which, he is refolved to make her miserable at all adventures, and is, at prefent, most warmly attached to one Smith, a fellow I remember to have Seen at Some public place or other; but know nothing of his connedtions.
Was Mifs Kennington’s heart as free as on our first acquaintance, Smith would never have been the object of her approbation. He leads a most debauched life in this city, and, without the least prejudice, is the roughest porterly fellow I ever met with.
The poor girl will most certainly undergo a fiery persecution:—she is naturally meek and yielding; but love is a wonderful improver of the Spirits and strengthener of the will; nor should I be Surprized if she should entirely renounce the foftnefs of her charadler to preferve lierfelf from violence.
Her
190 The HISTORY of
Her language upon common Subjects is engaging; hut she has had am opportunity of displaying her best abilities in the literary way, together with the goodnefs, the tendernefs of her difpoSition, and her most extraordinary capacity for amicable friendship.
You will perhaps be aware, by this just encomium on Mifs Kennington, that Patty Price is Soon to be introduced ; for the commendation of the one infenstbly leads to the commendation of the other.
But it would be no eafy talk to defcribe my feelings refpefling the latter. Self-condemnation, renewed esteem, a convi6l;ion of my own folly, cruelty, and injustice, and her purity, integrity, and greatnefs of foul, Succestivejy torment and distrefs me I
Lord Kennington’s baSenefs was no deception ; but Patty’s letter to her friend was diDated a-lone by confcious virtue and innocent vivacity: enclofed was the Severest rebuke she could possibly bestow, conveyed in fuch terms as could not fail to mortify and Search the most callous heart, at the Same time that it deprived that heart of all power of refentment. But let your own eyes convince you of her Sentiments and Spirit, though to my shame and confuSion, for having treated her So unworthily.
She is now at Mrs. Bateman’s. I little Siif-pedfed from what motive we were shunned by the widow; but we have incurred her patron’s diSpleafure, consequently should be very unwelcome visstants at her houfe.
I cannot be Satisfied without obtaining an interview, though but for a few moments, with the dear injured girl: I have no doubt but my
V contrition
I
Miss S D M M E R VI L E. 191
contrition will be accepted, notwithstanding the enormity of my tranfgrestion; the generous, Harry, and the brave, know both to pity and forgive, even their greatest enemies !
Lord Finly is reconfirmed in his refolution of marrying her, if he can but prevail upon her to confent; but she makes Such nice distinctions, and enters fo minutely into circumstances, that I greatly doubt his fuccefs. The woman that could difdain to she for favourable confideration, and compofedly receive unmerited cenfure and abuSe, must be capable of perfisting in whatever she deems an elTential point of propriety.
I shall henceforth endeavour to promote what I have fo officiousty oppofed. Was it for me to interfere in the difpoSition Lord Finly was pleafed to make of his perfon or fortune ? Should ■I have been the least shfferer by his advancing a lovely girl to a condition, however Splendid, that she was born to grace; or should I have derived the Smallest benefits from the disappointment of his wishes ? It was a mean contemptible conduct, and shall be renounced. Finly is not accountable to any one for his aCtions; he is the last branch of that ancient family; and, in cafe of his deceaSe without male issue, the title will devolve to a distant line.
I must tamper with Some of the widow’s Servants to procure the conveyance of a penitential epistle ; and if all the eloquence I am master of can be Serviceable to Finly, Patty’s Sentimental obstinacy shall be overcome.
I will acknowledge to you, by way of penance for past transgressions, that nothing but the certainty of my being an alien to Patty’s af-
feCtion,
192 The HISTORY OF
fefition, could have restrained me from the strongest attachment to her.
I find the human heart may be inSenstbly drawn on, from approbation to friendship, and from friendship to love.
I have, in vain, endeavoured to impofe upon myfelf,—and—you ;—for, till this moment that reafon predominates, remorSe mortifies and com-pastion Softens my foul, I have been a^ing upon the most unworthy principles of jealoufy and cruelty: for notwithstanding I was palpably convinced that Lord Finly^s happinefs depended upon his union with this Sweet girl, who, through all her modest referve v/as as evidently attached to him. I could not reconcile myfelf to receiving for a friend, the woman who would never, on the most honourable terms, have been my mistrefs, and whoSe friendship and good opinion I could never otherwife obtain.
I shall reap no inconSiderable advantage, Harry, from this flight wo^nd ;—it will cure my infidelity refpefiting other mprtals, and Secure me from too great confidence in myfelf for the future.	^
—To play with fire, is the way to burn our fingers; and converfing too frequently with an agreeable female, is the fame thing as baring our bofoms to the pointed steel.
I will not rest until I have made compensation for my error. — How defpicable a light I must appear in!—yet it is not my charafiter to be a monster; this Angle passion eradicated, and she will fee my natural Self: with you I am allowed to have Some merit; and your judgment is fo unexceptionable that it may be relied on ;—nor is your brother difinclined to think favourably of
me;—
Miss SOMMERVILE. 193
me; —■ he will convince his beloved Mifs Ken-nington of the happy change in my difposstion, and she will effeftually remove the hateful im-preflion Patty must have received of,
my dear Harry, yours, Stc.
Bradshaw.
LETTER XLVII.
Mifs Kennington to Mifs Carey.
IT is, my dear Dolly, with the utmost reluctance that I enter upon a fubjedf, the most painful and dipleaSing of any I ever met with.
Misfortunes to myfelf or friend I could have borne like a philofopher; but the knowledge I have acquired is beyond expression afflidfing.
Lady Sarah’s difagreeable attendant has been gone above a week, and her place Supplied by an exceeding good kind of young woman, who is very obliging to me.	i
She had fought Several opportunities of ferv-ft ing me ; as Patty’s sstuation at Mrs. Bateman’s' had been discovered by my Lord to Lady Sarahs I was at length perfuaded to intrust her with a letter of little more confequence than a How-do-you-do, to her.
She Seemed pleafed with her commission, and,’' I dare believe, executed it faithfully ; but I perceived, at her return, that her countenance was greatly disturbed, and, naturally enough enquired into the caufe.
VoL. II.	K	« I hope.
194 The HISTORY of
‘‘ I hope, madam, (faid she, heSitating) you will not be angry with me; but that young woman.—”
What ? who, Patty Price ? (demanded “ I, hastily.) Do you know any thing of her
‘‘ Know her, madam I only as well as I do mySelf; but I am convinced that is more than you do, or you w’ould never take So much notice of her.”
Take care, Mrs. Bret, (Said I) I have no ** reafon, it is true, to doubt your veracity; but “ she is a perfon I have a high esteem for; and it is not a little matter would occaSion me to “ withdraw it.”
“ Nay, madam, I have done : I am hire I never shall be a gainer by her in any refped;
** therefore I need not lofe--”
/»
Do not be fo hasty, (refuhied I, encoura-ging her) ; I did not wish to restrain you “ from fpeaking the truth; but to recoiled; yourfelf perfedily, lest you should be mifta' ken.”
“ Mistaken I no, no, madam ! I am not fo eassly mistaken ! many a pair of shoes has firf< her father heel-pieced for me, and an honeft worthy man he was : if her mother had been equally good, Patty would not have been the girl she now is; but she would make a fine fo.« lady of her, and the confequence was na-^V}‘ tural.”
It is impoffible! (exclaimed I) her father a w« cobler! I cannot believe it!”
“ Nay, madam, (returned she, rather difcon-‘‘ certed) I did not fay any fuch thing; — we lived in a little town, and he was both stioe-■	“ maker
Miss SOMMERVILE. 195
« maker and mender, and got a great deal of « money by his industry, which his wife and this girl took care to Spend.
« The mother had a fister at Exeter that A kept an inn, and miSs was Sent there for edu-“ cation. She learnt all that could be learnt at “ a country School; and having an opportunity “ of flirting with officers, and the command of “ money, was at fifteen a most finished lady;— “ but about fix months ago, a corporal of light-« horSe, that was quartered at her aunt’s, was deteded in Some very unbecoming liberties « with her, which occafioned her aunt to turn her out of doors.
“ She was prepared, it Seems, (continued she) fora march, — a different way indeed ; but « her fellow took a fever and died ; and she was never Seen afterwards at Exeter.”
I cannot have the least doubt of the truth of this relation. What interest could the girl have in inventing Such a tale ? But I am most reluctantly undeceived ; and, as I never was a Sufferer by the deception, could almost wish it had continued.—What unaccountable folly {
. She must be a baSe diffembler !—Happy Lord Finly to have efcaped her toils! I had wrote him a long letter, explaining the affair of my uncle to his utmost wish; and must now, from principle, make him acquainted with what I lave heard, or I should confider mySelf as acceS-fary to any fatal confequence.
Lady Sarah, Lord Kennington !—‘How “ shall I Support the shock of their exulta-“ tion ! — but Mr. Shugburgh will bring me “ through that, as well as every other exi-“ gence.”
K 2	I am
ig6 The HISTORY of
I am exceedingly m.iSerable at this jun0;ure. This man, my Lord has choSen for me, is fo bold and Self-Sufficient, that he does not even , give me an opportunity of refussng him. He is a Second Petriichio, and has been instrufled, no. doubt, by Lord Kennington to tame the mifera-ble JhreW) or he could never play his card So artfully.
I am ripe for rebellion, but my best assistant has failed me; and I am So *poor and helplefs a being of myfelf, that .1 fear I shall fall a facri-' fice to my Lord’s ambition and this wretch’s confidence:
Has my mother quite forgot her darling child ? and will not her paternal arms be open to receive me r •—.Dh! if she loved my father, she cannot' deny her proteftion to his Second Self; for am I not reckoned his very image ? I can no more! what will, alas I become of me, if she and you should forfakeme!	Adieu.
LETTER XLVIII.
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
Another letter, my Harry, from Mifs Kennington ! what can it mean ? Are -Patty’s refolves fo Soon overcome ? and am I deprived of an opportunity of being reconciled to .myfelf by one good adiion ?
Methinks it would have been more in character, after Such violent protestations, to have
yielded
Mrss SOMMER VILE. 197
yielded lefs abruptly; but it is a nice point tcy obferve due medi tcrity on any occasson. —» Sh6 Is a woman, Harry, whjch you know is but another name for frailty.
* * *
* «
The wifest people, in Some refpe£ls, are the eaSiest duped ; efpecially: if their principles' are juft and equitable, Mifs Kennington was appa-^ rently a timid creature ; ^but, as to the article of understanding, perfectly unexceptionable:.^— yet has she fuffered herfelf to bd impofed upon by Lady Sarah’s artistce and .malice, in the most egregious degree.
/ Patty, low-born and viciousty bred, the inhabitant of an inn, the mistrefs of a light-horfeman, a vagabond, a run-away; has not even the face Cl probability, and can only be heard, to be rejedted and defpifed. No, the happy deletion of my late error has enabled me to form .a better judgment of things, than to fwallow fo pitiful, fo unnatural a bait.
I am, for once, moist unexpedtedly indebted to fortune, for favouring my wishes; and shall yet be the instrument of good to the much-injured Patty, and conciliate-her valuable esteem without an advocate.
There is a fellow at Mrs. Bateman’s with a very intelligent tho’ roguish afpedt; I will lie in wait for him,, and, if he has one fpark of vanity or ambition in his whole composttion, win him to mv purpofe.
I will immediately to Dartmouth-street, be-fpeak a quantity of things, pay for them beforehand,' for the woman’s Security, and then ssft her
K 3	with
ipS The history of
with all my art. She must either have had Some acquaintance with Patty, or very extraordinary recommendation of her, cr fhe would never
have received her into her houfe.--Adieu ; I
will be with you again prefently.
#	* m *	*
O Harry I I found the gcod, the affeS-ionate milliner in astli6fion and tears on Patty’s account; she has been conveyed from Mrs. Bateman’s, to ■what place, or for what purpofe, is it possible to judge.
Can she have put herfelf under Mr. Shug-hurgh’s protedfion ? or has the vile tale of her birth, education, and conduD, been invented to deprive her of his countenance ? Lord Kenning-ton durst not, could not violently, or at least fe-cretly, bear her off; Some vestige would have remained.
Mrs. Bateman would not See this good crea-ture; but returned for anfwer to her tender enquiries, That she was ignorant of the new stage Mrs. Patty appeared upon ; but thought “ her wife in decamping at the instant of de-teftion.”
“ It is hard Sir (Said Mrs. Trueman) to be de-“ nied a reafonable piece of information, where one’s own interest alone is concerned ; but “ when the well-being of the best and deareft friend we have upon earth is at stake, it be-“ comes infnpportable. Mifs Patty ill deferves ‘‘ the treatment she has met with. — Mr. Shug-“ burgh. Lord Kennington, all are against her! “ nay, even the good-natured Mifs Kennington tacitly approves their Severity!
I pity
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 19/
“ I pity their limited fight and narrow judg-** ments, (continued she.) — Mifs Patty’s ap-pearance and behaviour befpeak her what she « is; — few coblers daughters — but I am fi-“ lenced by her injundtion, and they shall still “ hug their error for me. If my reSolution is “ but equal to Support her abfence, she shall not “ be betrayed.”
I can never believe, (Said I) that Mr. Shug-burgh’s face is Set against her, however, poor Mifs Kennington may be misted; but in “ what refpedt, madam, could Mifs Price be “ injured by your revealing her family, if neither “ mean nor unworthy. Perhaps you might “ more effedlually Serve her by difobeying, than
‘‘ complying with her commands.”---------
“ I own, fir, I do not fee with the fame eyes; “ for the heart that would refist the imprefiion of “ her merit, cannot be very fufceptible of any other. Humanity is no refpedter of perfons; life “ and health are equally precious to the prince and the beggar ; and Mifs Patty ought now to ‘‘ be as much the objedl of your confideration, “ from being a worthy and oppressed individual, “ as if you was convinced she was the heirefs of “ a baronet.”
I, fir, (added she) am but little difpofed for “ conversation, unlefs I could be ufeful to my “ injured friend. If you now doubt her worthy “ it cannot be in the power of argument to con-“ vert your unbelief; and if you do not judge ” her hardly, can you have a more noble or “ more generous purshit than discovering what “ hands she is fallen into ?—Every thing is prac-“ ticable with your Sex;—but we are born tc “ difficulties, helplesshefs, and cenfure.”
K 4	I have
i.oo The HISTORY o?
✓
I have now nothing to depend upon but the fellow I mentioned., Finly and Bob fhall remain' ignorant of this affair until I have, in fome measure, unravelled it.
Do not applaud my refolution ; for, Harry, I blush to acknowledge that I fear I am more anxious for the honour of Serving Patty, than tender of poor Finly’s repofe; however, he will be Spared many hours Suffering, let my motive be what it may.
\
^
I have patroled the street the whole afternoon; but my fuccefs has, by no means, equalled the goodnefs of my caufe. I will renew my walk after Supper until twelve.
May your pillow, this night, afford you the Soft stumbers of tranquility, which an imperial canopy could not bestow upon
your, &c.
Bradshaw.
LETTER XLIX.
/
Mifs Kennington to Mils Carey.
_	9
SINCE I am deprived, my Dolly, of my grand fubjedf, I must, of necessity, deScend to a leSs important one. This Smith that torments me with his horrid addresses, is the fellow on earth that would be the most hateful to
you:
Miss SOMME RVILE. 201
you: yet does he conceive hlmfelf Secure of my* heart and hand ; nor once fufpeSts it possible' that he can be an objedi of diSgust and detestation 1
I
Mr. Shugburgh is but newly, acquainted .with their intentionshe shrugs his shoulders, stghs, —and regards me with compashon ; but he is a man of Such nice honour, that he would never countenance a breach of duty or friendship, but from extraordinary motives. .
IS my mother .could be prevailed upon, to pay fonre attention to her child’s happinefs, I am certain, she has>the power of obviating his ob-jeSIion to poor Mr. Fleetwood. •.
I Send, you enclofed a copy of his brother’s generous-pFopoSalsi You are intimate with a family that is a near neighbour of this elder gen-» tleman’s, and to them I refer you^ for the cha- -rafter of each of them. >
But my mother’s Silence and neglefi of me terrifies me!—What can I apprehend to be the caufe ?—Can she. be difpleafed with any part of my conduct?—Has any one attempted to preju^ dice her against me ? Or has (yet I shudder at ^ the bare idea of fuch a thing!)-—has she entered’., into any nev/. conneftion.;
I, indeed, have no right to judge,' condemn, or even question her; but. Surely, she will forgive the tender anxiety of an affeftionate child, accustomed to receive every mark of maternal goodnefs, every token of pajentaFconfideration.
I will not be trifled with, Dolly, upon this head : you have. Several times, waved or disregarded my interrogatories; but I am now determined to know the very worst, nay, tho’ the ca-
K- 5	lamity
2,02 The history of
/
lamity should even exceed my frighted imagi-nastQn!
DoTsot forfake me, oh, my dear mother ! nor you, my dear friend, at this formidable period, i cannot accept Mr. Smith for my hushand, nor will my stubborn heart forego its attachment to Mr. Fleetwood. Do but once reconcile my duty and love, and no heroine was ever more en-terprifing than I would become !
My uncle does not even intend to pay my mother the compliment of confulting her upon the occaston.—Who can condemn his wifdom, when a handfome jointure is to be fecured to me, and he is to have the loan of a considerable fura continued to him at a very low intereft during his life?—Will you not interrupt the execution of Such horrid bartering?
Patty—but I refolved not to mention her;-C. yet 1 must fell you, poor Patty has confirmed the evil report against her by flying the field. Mrs. Bateman came to inform us of her departure, and laid many heavy things to her charge,
which I utterly di'fbelieve.
•/
Lady Sarah affedls great moderation upon the cccafion : but I fear it is merely affeSation; for she has a truly malicious and revengeful heart.
My Lord will not fuffer her name to be mentioned before him; he is outrageous in his re-fentment.— Difappointed paffion and mortified pride are powerful agitators.
As to rriystlf, I feel as if awaking from a most horrible dream ;—the impreffion is So strong that I can hardly doubt its reality, notwithstanding a fcmething whifpers me, to recollect its impropriety and want of connection.
Mr.
Miss S O M M E R V I L E, 203
Mr. Shugburgh is still himfelf; — no one ac-cuSation or refledfion has eScaped his lips; — he is more thoughtful than ufual;—shakes his head infenSibly, and cries, ** Poor thing! was it for
this she refuSed So many great offers ?’*
A mean-looking woman, it Seems, has been to enquire after her, and was quite clamorous and abustve, becaufe Mrs. Bret would not introduce her to me., I was fo low-fpirited thatl really was much indebted to her caution, for Saving me the trouble of refustng her, * .
I ;am naturally unfit for rough encounters; ■ but more particularly fo at this feafon. .
Mr. Fleetwood has wrote me a very tender letter, and I, in return, have given him every Satisfa6lion in my power; but have declared, (in the fame instant, that I promife never to receive another man for myshushand) that I never will be his without my mother’s fandion and con-^ i-fent.
If he has the matter as much at heart as he * pretends, you will go near to receive a vilit from ; his brother. .
He is a ^well-bred man, Dolly, and would ■ come upon no unjustifiable errand; — but, my dear mother and you too well understand the treatment due to a gentleman, to need any in-: strudions from Such a mushroom as
yours, &ci.
»	S.'Kensington.
' ' f	.	.	.	>	^
204 The HISTORY of
’*^''C0OC''^'’OC0O''^^''OMO*‘^’'0000*'^^**CO0O*>^"C06O'’^**O09O'*^**#OO0'*^^'0#00'*^*’C0##»^^r'.
^	c	s	s	:	s	:	i	:	i	t.
/
LETTER L.
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
I Did not fail, Harry, to be Sufficiently early at my destined post, in a shabby coat that gave me rather the appearance of a fidler than a gentleman ; and as all forts of cornpany are welcome at Mrs. Bateman’s, I dare fay Robert will neither conceive an opinion of me Superior to that charafiter, nor be Surprized to recolle61: his having stood behind my chair at his mistreSs’s table.
An hour and an half elapfed before one creature came forth from Mrs. Bateman’s; but, at length, I had the Satisfa6i:ion to perceive, by ihe light of the lamp, the very fellow I had marked down for my purpoSe-, and had no great difficulty to prevail upon him to give me his company at an adjacent tavern.
A bottle of wine was brought, and he Soon entered into that familiarity I wished, Sung me a good Song, and to'd two or three excellent adventures he had been engaged in. This you will fay, was fetching a violent compaSs; but it brought us, in due time, to the destred point.
“ And pray, Mr. Robert, (Said I) how does “ your lady and MiSs Price agree now ? Fe-“ male friendships are Seldom durable ; and I “ really think, according to the old proverb, “ Theirs was abundantly tco hot to hold.”
o
/ -
/
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 205
O Sir I (returned he with a most ssgnifi-cant look) there were reafons of state for all “ my mistrefs’s proceedings; a wheel within a “ wheel is no unufual thing, fir :—and, fir, my very humble Service to you.”
You are very drole, Mr. Robert ; but I fuppofe it is necestary to be pretty clever to wait upon Mrs. Bateman ; she is a woman of << amufement, and fees much company.”
“ The Scene is ever shifting, (refumed he) ‘‘ from one folly to another: in short, fir, thefe great folks are mighty apt to conclude that “ we little ones, their domestics, are arrant dri-veliers. Such hints. Such conversation paf-‘‘ Ses often at table ;—but I never was a blab:— “ and So, if you pleafe, we will drink the la-“ dies healths.”
“ If you include Mifs Patty in the number, “ (replied I) I have no objeSlion ; otherwife, to be plain with you, I fiiould iiot be much “ inclined to bestow So great a compliment up-“ on them.	'
“ Mrs. Bateman is a very agreeable woman ; “ but I am not io happy as to be a favourite “ with her; and we Seldom love thofe, Mr. “ Robert, who flight us:—and. For MiSs Turn-“ er — Your good health, my friend; we will “ fay nothing about her.”
“ She is a tiger (cried he) in her diSpofition ; “ that’s certain ; nor does her Sister want for “ Spirit on cccafion ; but she always treated Patty (the rastal) with civility, until the other “ day, when it fee ns she was informed of her being the most unworthy aswvell as meanest “ of creatures. She then refolved to get rid of her ; but I do not think she would have been
“ So
2o6 The H I S T O R Y of
« So rigorous, if Lord Kennington had not in-fisted upon it.”
“ You deal in riddles, my friend, (faid I) I hope you do not believe me capable of abu-Sing any confidence you might repofe in me. ** I have no finall interest in Patty’s affairs; and “ —I stipt a fee into his hand,—which, alone, can open (or most effectually filence) the wide-^ ** mouthed pleader.”
** I don’:^See why I should be afraid of fpeak-irrg (obfer#ed he as he pocketted the Mrs. Bateman is notorious for refuling to give “ a character of any Servant that leaves her, how'ever deferving.”
It, is not, therefore, well to mifs an op-<< portunityi,(ff making a friend : — and So fir, to our beiler acquaintance; and now I will tell you
I drew my chair quite clofe to the table, breathed with the utmost caution, for fear .of inter-i rnpting him,t^nd as impatiently waited for the movement of^is lips, as a member for the return of the vo|es at a doubtful eledion. .
At length, 'f Why, fir? you must know, that we fervants have a means of intelligence pe-“ culiar to ourstlves, w'hich I need not commu-** nicate. Many letters passed between Lord “ Kennington and my Lady, as well as private confultation, before this Patty was introduced . ** at our hoiife. We understood the whole clue. She came, my mistrcTs affeCfed great affeCfion for her, and my Lord was for ever pressing to drop in as if by accident.
My mistrefs kept him off as long as she “ could, as she was ienfible Patty had too much “ understanding not to fee through her arts;
« but
Miss SOMME RVILE. 207
« but, at last, his Lordship’s impatience got the << better of her fears. He came ; she left them together, to the little fatisfadtion of each par-ty. This will never do, (faid my Lord to my mistrefs, as she waited on him to the door), « we must fix on Some other means.”
She is a whimfical girl, make the best of her (Said my mistrefs) but your Lordship ‘‘ may depend on me.”
‘‘ In a few days he renewed his vifit; but “ with no better fuccefs than before: but, per-« haps, I tire you.”
“ You oblige me extremely (faid I, appre-<< henfive, lest a Sudden qualm of confcience “ had feized him); take your glafs and pro-ceed.”
His Lordship and my mistrefs, (reSumed he, bowing) v/ere shut up for fome hours:—high words pasted, — my mistrefs was vexed, and,
I am certain, shed many tearsfor her eyes ‘‘ were red the whole day after. -T was fent for “ an attorney, who received diredlions to make “ out a long bill for board and money lent, ‘‘ merely to intimidate her, and take out a writ immediately:—in a word, fir, the poor girl was arrested the next morning.—You feem disturbed ; I hope she Was no relation of ‘‘ yours;—but I beg your pardon ; I had forgot how every thing came out.”
“ Do not mind me, Mr. Robert (astuming all possible compofure); but proceed with your story.”
To be fure, she went most bitterly, (added^ “ he) and looked at Ti; many times, as if she “ had afked me to pity her.”
“ The bailiff was a rough, ill-natured fel-
low.”
2o8 The H I S T O R Y of
“ low.” It is to no purpoSe to blubbeV; (fald “ he) make a friend, if you can, and releafe yourfelf at once.”
“ I had many friends, (Said fhe) at one perst
od ; but fear they have all forfaken me.--------
“ Might I be indulged with pen and ink ?”
Aye, aye ; let her write as much as (he ‘‘ -will, (faid the bailiff) and we will read it, T think it will be best not to lofe time tsto’—— Is the coach ready?”
J
“ Patty, (faid my mistrefs) why will you be' obstinate; you know you may command any Sum you pleafe; but if you are determined to perSist in being your own enemy, can you' “ wonder at me ?”
“ Whatever are my Sentiments, madam, (re-turned fhe) you do not hear me complain. • I am ready, gentlemen, to attend you. 1 wilf have no friends, but of my own chustng.” My dear Patty, let me prevail with you^ (cried my mistrefs) his Lord—”
“ I have told you, gentlemen, ^repeated fhey difregarding my mistrefs) my refolution : — “ conduQ; me, therefore, wherever you are au-« thorized.”
V
Well, well, young woman, you will Smart “ for this, take my word for it (faid the bailiff): “ the houfe I fhall conduct you to is not fo fine as this.”
“'My heart bled for her at that time; but “ now I know what she is, I make it matter of laughter. And fo, fir, if you pleafe, we will drink our friends in the fponging-houfe. Audacious rafcal! but there was no remedy. “ My mistrefs (continued he) took the fellow afide, (for it was all a farce,, on purpcfe to
stiglv
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 209
fright her) and it was determined that she should stay at our houfe till the next morn-ing ; the bailiff to Sit up in the adjoining room to hers.”
“ My mistreSs looked very hagged and diS-contented the whole evening.” “ I will have ** you go with a message from me, Robert, ‘‘ (faid she) to Patty; poor thing ! she is very inconSiderate!” “ I was then filling her a glafs of wine, to her fupper, when a great bounce at the door furprized us both! My mistrefs was terrified!”—Who can it be, “ So late !”—■	I Soon, however, relieved her
anxiety, by bringing her a letter a drunken chairman gave me for her, from Lord Ken-nington; which laid the whole of Patty’s villainy before her.”—
“ Well, we will pafs over that part, if you pleafe, (faid I).—“ How did she behave, af-** terwards ?”
- Quite like a happy woman; and, indeed, I never pitied her fince.—Fetch a coach, this instant, Robert, (faid she) and fee that wick-ed wretch but out of ray houfe, and I shall be Satisfied.”	<
“ The bailiff Seemed very well pl'eafed at being dismissed:—she got into the coach with great compofure; nor once replied to all the “ reproaches my lady made her.”
I had heard enough to put me upon the rack. — “I fear I have over-staid my time, (Said I, ‘‘ looking at my watch, as if furprized.) You “ must finish the bottle yourfelf, my friend ; ** and I hope, we shall meet fome other e-vening.”
I fuppofe you are already in imagination at
the
/
2to The history of
the fponging-houfe, condoling with the lovely ' Sufferer!—But not So fast ; — the houfe was fhut up, and I could not, myfelf, obtain admittance until the next morning.
I never was expert at description ; — but it was a horrible place. — There (he fat, pale and wan ; yet with that dignity and compofure fo peculiar to herfelf.
A faint blush overfpread her face, when I approached her, and a fparkle of pleafure for a moment informed her now-deje£led eye; but, recollediing the treatment she had received at my hands, she turned away her head with the utmost Signistcance.
I befeech you, madam, (faid I) not to add forrow to the afflidled ! I come, at once, to obtain pardon for the past, and to render ** myfelf ferviceable to you.—I am convinced, that you are the worthiest of your fex, and I a prefuming, officious—”
I have been fo often deceived, (replied she, in heart-wounding accents) that I have no confidence remaining I — My hopes — but,
“ pray, what has induced you to make me a . ** viSit in this gloomy manfion ?
You can never be fo mean as to fubmit to “ do Lord Kennington’s dirty work, notwith-standing Mrs. Bateman, by yielding to his “ importunity, has brought this unmerited dif-“ trefs upon my miferable head.”
“ I deferve the refleQiion, madam, (faid I) bitter as it is! but, believe me, to behold you innocent, though in fo dreadful a place, gives me more fatisfadlion than I have words “ to exprefs! I had fome difficulty to difcover ** what they had done with you ; but, frosh
their
t
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 21 i
their poorly-deviSed tale, I concluded Some “ Such mifchief had befallen you.”
What then ? (returned she, with vlSible fa-‘‘ tisfa6:ion.) Do you difcredit that notable re« ‘‘ port ? I thank you, however, for that piece of kindnefs. I own you had fome grounds “ for your former fufpicions; but to fall a prey to fuch little malice is, beyond meafure, mor-tifying. — It is a noble bufineSs, (added she) ‘‘ to join hands upon, when, Singly, their pow-“ er was fufficient to crush So inconssderable a ‘‘ mortal ! But there is no part of the evil I have Sustained affedis me, except the lofs of “ two worthy hearts, that I had flattered my-“ felf were beyond the reach of even the strong-“ est blast of malevolence ! Mrs. Bateman tells “ me I have not one friend left.”
There must be fome mistake, madam, in that particular as well as many others. Mifs Kennington, indeed, is neither mistrefs of her ** time nor inclination ; but the honest Shug-“ burgh, I wonder he has not made fome en-quiry about you : I must have fome conver-“ fation with him, and learn his reafons.”
“ I hope. Sir, (Said she) you will do me the justice to inform him, it is all your own zSt and deed.—Pride is the infirmity of my na-“ ture, notwithstanding all my reputation for the oppofite virtue : nor could I defcend to “ follicit the friend that was Inclined to with-‘‘ draw himfelf.”
It would have been to no purpofe to oflFer my ashstance; I therefore, took my leave after a little more conversation, and Sought out Shug-jpurgh, whom I had the pleafure to find was not lefs warm in her caufe than uSual.
He
212 The HISTORY OF
He adviSed the-utmost Secrecy in all our steps ;• feared there had Been much foul play ; but feemr ed difpostd rather to throw the blame upon Mrs. Bateman than my Lord ; and promifed to call upon me to-morrow morning.
This is a long letter; but I.hope you will'allow pretty much to the purpofe. 1 am convinced the father and daughter have been playing into one, another’s hands, without intending it, by which means this worthy girl has been reduced to fuch deplorable circumstances. But it is a point, that will neither bear, nor is worth, clearing up, as the malice of the one, and the love of the other, have equally mifcarried. Adieu,	Bradshaw.
s «’	\	;	.*	:	*•' \	;	*•* 'v l \	;	%	; F \	-.	»'	\ i i? \ t	t
LETTER LI.
Mifs Carey to^Mr. Shugburgk.
I
I Am too well acquainted with your chara6ier and difpoSition, to apprehend you will be either offended or alarmed at a little trouble. Poor Mifs Kennington’s misfortunes Seem to multiply upon her head ; nor dare I communicate,.but through your means, the melancholy news of her mother’s death.
The double astlidlion her mind laboured under, of penury and the lofs of a valuable huf-band, were too much for her delicate frame, nor did the necessity of parting with her daughter Sit eafy upon her heart. She would not, however.
Mi§s S O M M E H V I L E. 213
-ever, permit me to give the least intimation of her declining state, as she Said it could only interrupt her child’s pleafures and aggravate her pains, without the least ufe either to the one or the other.
I have, from real affedlion (for she was a worthy creature!) as well as the motives of friendship to MiSs Kennington, omitted no one thing in my power to chear and fupport her, though without fuccefs. My Lord’s favour reached her too late ; she died before the purchafe-money was paid, and it is now in difpute, who has a proper title ts it. I fear Mifs Kennington is not upon fuch terms with her uncle, as to derive any advantage to herfelf in this affair; therefore, in my hurrible opinion, it will be best to conceal it as long as poffible.
You cannot be So well informed of my prin-' ciples as I am of yours, or it would be unnecessary to affure you I am incapable of deceiving ■any one.
It was Mrs. Kennington’s dying request, that her daughter should rather confult her happinefs than interest, and accept Mr. Fleetwood’s generous propofals.
His brother lives only a few miles from us, and was introduced to our acquaintance one fortnight before Mrs. Kennington’s deceafe : she has given her cor.fent, under hand to that gentleman, which I dare believe he will remit you by the earliest opportunity.
In one of his vistts “ I have not a wish (faid she to Mr. Fleetwood) beyond bestowing my daughter upon your brother, as youffo warm-“ ly interest yourfelf in his fatisfadiions.' I know v/hat love is.; you behold me a martyr
to
f
214 -The tllSTOR Y OF
to the tenderest attachment—■ yet, perhaps, “ all the evil of my life had been prevented, if I had duly attended to the importance of be-“ ing well-received by the family of my huf-band.—Sally, by making your brother happy, will avoid the rock of my destruffion ; (for I shall ever think that poor Mr. Kennington’s << life was shortened by the ill uSage of his re-lations on my account) and it is infinitely con-foling to me, in thefe my last moments, to refleft upon her favourable profpedts.”
“ Intreat Mr. Shugburgh to perform that «« office the hand of death denied her doating father! and may their union reap the benefits of the departing blessing of a most affedlio-nate mother! — Oh, fir! forgive me, if I mention she was both a most lovely and va-luable woman !—But all is over, and encomi-«« urns are of little ufe.”
My dear Mifs Kennington is now deprived of every proteflion and provifion, but what she must either derive from my Lord or Mr. Fleet-wood. You are no stranger to his cruel pur-pofes; and, should you permit her to be Sacrificed, would be the most inhumane of the two. Pardon my warmth; but the fubjedt requires it: her nature is Soft, gentle, and ill-fuited to affliction ; — and the grave would Soon hide her for ever from our eyes.
I have no doubt of your inclination to Serve her; but do not, my good fir, fuffer that inclination to be restrained or overcome, by any consideration on earth ! — Ought any thing to be put in competition with So valuable a life ?
I am
\
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 215
I am convinced you have the power to Save her; I will therefore, be fo bold as to tell you, that I shall require her happinefs at your hands; and am, fir, &c.	D. Carey.
LETTER LII.
Mifs Kennington to Mifs Carey.
Things are now, my dear Dolly, approaching to a crifis; my wedding-cloaths are already providing; judge, then, if my date at Lord Kennington’s is not short.
Mr. Shugburgh tells me the winds are against me, or I should be miferably impatient for an anfwer to my last letter. Do not omit writing by the first opportunity. Poor Patty Price, to what an unhappy state has she brought herfelf ? —She is in custody, my dear, as Mr. Bradshaw informed Mr. Shugburgh yesterday. I wish once more to fee her; but know not how to accomplish it. This mortal of a man never leaves me an instant.
Should she procure her enlargement, as I doubt not but she will, by Mr. Shugburgh’s means, I will look upon her, with even this e-vil one at my elbow, (Since it cannot be avoided) rather than forego the defire of my heart.
Mr. Fleetwood is upon the rack for my determination. What can I fay to him ? My mother and yourielf have the entire difpofal of me.
Mr.
2i6 The HISTORY of
Mr. Shugburgh has been with me—and is it poITible, Dolly, that my dear mother and you are equally unanimous with my inclination ? Indeed, you can never repent your favourable fen-timents of this worthy young gentleman : — but my commendation will but little avail him, as I shall be fuppofed to be too partial to judge him fairly.
Had Patty Price — I cannot wean my wifhes from her, however convinced of their folly and impropriety. She was all;—but I have done: her grofs diflimulation has fet my heart at liberty.
Mr. Shugburgh is to provide a place for my reception : expedition is necessary, or I shall be undone. I am indebted to Lady Sarah for thefe hasty preparations in Mr. Smith’s favour ; as Ihe ■ cannot rest, it feems, until I am honourably dif-pofed of.
Honour is with her an empty name, or Ihe would never fo vilely prostitute it; for the union that is effedted contrary to the inclination, must, of courfe, be stridlly comformable both with honour and confcience !
If once I was but delivered out of this houfe, 1 should be in no hurry to change my condition. My early time of life, and the want of a ftip-porting female, would incline me to postpone the affair until my arrival in England. —I have, however, promifed to be implicitly governed by my worthy Mr. Shugburgh.
I hope I shall not be obliged to fee Lord Fin-ly-—what melancholy refledtions we should both
of
Miss SOMMER VILE. 217
of us experience!—Our taste, our attachment— It .is Surely extraordinary, that 1 cannot keep clear of that unhappy girl! I cannot conceive how Mr. Shugburgh means to proceed : he certainly gives a fingular proof of his affedlion for me, when he is unmindful, for my Sake, of e-very confequence of difobliging his old friend.
I am strangely upon the flats I — Oh, Patty ! Patty ! that I had never known you I
I am, &c.
S. Kenningtont.
LETTER LIII.
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
YOU have, indeed, Harry, given the strongest proofs of fraternal regard I ever heard of; but extraordinary actions are So common with you, .that, upon recolledtion, we confefs it is only a6ting conststently, when you a6t most nobly!
Mr. Shugburgh is higstly'delighted with his commistlon; but apprehends that poor MiSs Kennington’s joys will Soon be blasted by the discovery of her mother’s death.
He is refolved not only to Set Patty at liberty, from her preSent difgraceful confinement, but to place her Some-where in eafe and Security ; and (if she will, at length, be prevailed upon to communicate Some few particulars to justify her condu6t) she is to be perfefbly restored to all her former estimation and confequence.
VoL. II.	L	lean
2i8 The HISTORY of
I can read Finly’s wishes in his eyes; but flie is So extravagantly >nice, that I fear we must take our trip without her ; tho% believe me, my friend, there will be a good many words to that bargain.
We are all to embark for the South of France fo foon as the ceremony is over, and I hope fome saver Scenes will await us than we have of late been engaged in. We are to viSit Patty in the afternoon.
^
We have not only made our vifit to Patty, but have delivered her from durance. It was a most iniquitous aflion, and would but little redound to the honour of the parties concerned in it, if fairly stated. But private motives of our own will preferve them from the world’s cen-Sure.
“ My poor girl! (faid Mr. Shugburgh, in the tenderest accent) your Sufferings have been great! but Providence, you fee, has never ‘‘ absolutely forfaken you I If you have paffed your days innocently, you are, indeed, a moft “ valuable creature ! but if vice has ever been ** familiar to your heart, I hope the great raer-cies you have experienced, will incite you to renounce it for ever. Vice, (continued he) is a worm that must perpetually prey upon fucli =a mind of yours.
So fenfible of every requisite in the female charadier—of lovely delicacy, propriety, and “ stneerity, how could you Support the confei-ouSneSs of adting in diredi opposition to the ■lights you are bleffed with? But do not let
“ me
Miss SOMMERVILK 219
me wound where I wish to heal ! Only be “ perSuaded to try no more experiments; but, by accepting of that prote<5tion I have long “ wished to afford you, avoid every future ‘‘ evil.”
Alas, fir! (Said she) I have no choice re-‘‘ maining: difpofe of me as you pleafe. My ‘‘ gratitude, my warmest affeftion shall be ever yours. -
I am now convinced I have a6led upon a wrong plan ; I knew nothing of life or man-kind, or I should not thus have expoSed my-felf. My history Seems to have attained its ‘‘ termination, and I can plead no further ex-CLife, even to my own heart, for longer con-cealment. But Mifs Kennington (added she, fighing) must be prefent at the opening of “ it; for, fir, it is a story that can be told but once.”
The alteration in her voice, and the dejedfion of her countenance, at this period, chilled my very foul — Of what nature can her adventures be ?
Mr. Shugburgh, who is paSt the age of cu-riofity, and whole benevolence is Superior to e-very other pastion, replied :
We wist wait your own time, my child; —you rejoice me to hear you talk So rational-“ ly. How inconsistent to call thoSe friends, you are afraid to trust with any particulars: I always conSidered your obstinacy, in that ref-“ pe6t, as the worst part of your charadter.” We lodged her once more at her friend the milliner’s; but,' you may be assured, she will never again appear behind the counter.
I am, &c.	Bradshaw.
La	LET-
22,0 The hi S T ORN of
/ •
» .'
^ i
LETTER LIV.
%
Lady Sarah Kennington to Mils Turner. Dear Mils Turner,
WHAT an 'unfortunate wretch I am!
Patty is once more triumphant, and all my fchemes blown unfuccefsftilly- off!
It Seems the tale would not have been Sufped:-ed if the angelic Soul had not been placed So low as an honest Crispin’s daughter. I own I did not Sufficiently attend to that circumstance, or the colouring should have been more judicioufly bestowed.
/	After all, I believe she will flip through my
fingers, unleSs you can prevail upon yourfelf to return to Dublin. Your fister is a clumfy plotter as well as mySelf; but your abilities, I know, mayshe depended upon.
Abfolutely'now, I think I should have been taken in by that appearance of Sincerity my woman assumed; but her being recommended by Squib, was the bane of her credit and my hap-pinefs.
I will not be So hasty for the future;—but will examine a bussnefs through all its turnings before I hazard the execution of it.«r-But enough of this fubjeft for the prefent.
Sarah’s match goes Smoothly on; but I have been So accustomed to disappointment lately,
that
Miss SOMMER VILE. 221
that I shall not depend upon any event that is not aQ.ually past.
If any* evil accident should intervene on this occaSion; Mr., Shugburgh will be the author of it. I cannot imagine how my Lord can entertain Such a fellow in his houfe, to be a fpy, nay, a .cheek truly, upon all his adfions. Times are greatly altered; for, would you believe it, he has had the vanity,and prefumption, more than once, to attempt to restrain both him and me from following, our own inclinations.
He has, indeed, a good decent fura of money in his power; but I deSpair.of ever fingering a fingle shilling; for our tastes, (the boor!) opinions rather, are So diametrically oppofite, that !• am fenSible.he regards me as a defperate fine lady; and I look upon him.i^as a kind of half-polished favage.
But where can this low wretch have concealed herfelf .f“ Our doors, I am pofitive, were shut against her and all her gang : nor can I conceive (now your Sister'has given her up) that one creature in all Dublin would be fo madly abfurd as to take her under their roof, .
Her artifice, nevertheless# is immeasurable; nor can any accident, or crofs-attack, throw her out of her element,. It is plain she is unable to produce one perfon to- fpeak favourably of her, or she would,-on this oceafion, have drawn them forth.
We never are to be Satisfied: my first wish was merely to drive her to a distance, and now I regret that she has efcaped my power. Only think of Brett’s ingenuity I she had never Seen Mrs. Patty’s face in her life, or heard a Syllable concerning her; yet; from my representation,
L 3	undertook
I
222 The HISTORY of
undertook to handle her; for which end she became the most pliable ufeful thing in nature to Sarah.
My dear miSs, I am never So happy as when obeying your commands; I am going out this afternoon ; have you no message to any of your trades-people ? no little employment for me ?”
Yes, the fool had a letter to Mifs Price; Brett brought it to me, I turned it infide out, with the utmost dexterity :—all stuff and nonfen fe I— She conveyed it Safe, obtained a Sight of the lady, and returned home in the best-dif. fembled flutter I ever Saw in my life.
My Lord, old Shugburgh, and I, were together : Mifs Sarah had stole away, to her pen, I fuppofe.
‘‘ What is the matter, Brett ? (demanded I), << You are difcompofed.”
“ Oh, madam I (cried she) I dare not tell you.”
*	‘‘ Pray, Mrs. Brett, (Said ray father. Smiling)
“ conSider, a lady’s curiofity must not be trifled with ; and, upon my honour, to confefs the truth, I feel mySelf rather inquifltive upon the occaflon.”
“ Nay, madam, (reSunned she) nothing but “ Mifs Price, I think she is called.—Well, Lord bleSs us! how miScbief will out ! I little ** thought of feeing her in Ireland !”
Why, do you know any thing of her?” exclaimed each of the gentlemen, in the fame instant.
** More than is good, I can affure your Lord-** ship! (Said she. Smartly) she has led a moft ■
irregular
Miss SOMMER VILE. 223
irregular life! and is now upon her wits, I “ fuppofe, for a livelihood.”
My Lord’s countenance brightened, Shug-Burgh lowered, v/ith mortihcation,—-whilst Brett related the particulars, you ic ceived by the last post; but they, neither of them, vouchsafed to Speak their Sentiments. His Lordfhip wrote a letter instantly, — difpatched it by a chairman, and ordered his coach to be ready in the morn-ing.
It Seems Mrs. Patty and Mrs. Bateman are but upon indifferent terms; for She Seemed under great uneastnefs, and your stster condudied Brett to and from her, herfelf, as if fhe was anpre-KenSive of tales:—and, wlrat was very extraordinary, two ill-looking lellows were stuck up in a'corner of the room, as if on Some important buSinefs.
I ihall renew my enquiries to-morrow, and. hope to give you a more fatisfadlory account of your, &c.	S. Kennington.
V
LET T E R„ LV.
MiSs Kennington to MiSs Carey.
PATTY, my dear girl, is restored to liber-r ty, and an almost equal degree of credit and approbation us ufual. Mr. Bradshaw, as I told you, discovered the place of confinement, and, notwithstanding her distressful condition,
L 4	her
A
224 The HISTORY of
her prudence remained unfubdued ; nor would Ihe accept of his Services in any refpe6i:.
He faid he would apply to Mr. Shugburgh in her favour; she did not oppofe that offer; yet begged he would not make uSe of her name, as she could not think of folliciting friendship that,, in appearance, was cooled..
He flew with his accustomed benevolence to relieve her, made fatisfadfion for a most unjust demand, and reconveyed her to Mrs. Trueman’s, who received her w'ith tranfports.
It Seems they had a good deal of conversation. —Patty’s Spirits were low. She confessed an ilh natured world was too mighty to contend with; and therefore she found herSelf difpoSed to communicate the particulars of her life, previous to our knowledge of her ; but intreated Mr. Shugburgh would bring me to be preSent at the relation.
I never was So impatient, under restraint, as at rhis period.—What can she Say in her justification ? — How account for Some mysterious parts of her condudt ? I remember, indeed, Ihe assured me at Holyhead, with the strongest appearance of stncerity, that her reServe did not refult from guil|t; it is, nevertheless, very extraordinary, to have run through So many difficulties that might have been avoided, by clearing up our doubts reSpefling her connedfions.
If she can give us all the fatisfadfion I am inclined to hope for, what unexpedled happinefs will it be to my heart, which, in Spite of all the cruel aSperSions of her enemies, yearns unSpeak-ably towards her.
But this odious Smith, to give him the flip will be no eaSy matter; wherever I go he is my
constant
Miss S O M M E R VI L E. 225
constant companion ; and," unfefs I hazard his picking up a tale for Lady Sarah at Mrs. Trueman’s, by taking him with me under pretence oS ' buying'Some finery, I must deny myfelf the pleasure she is inclined to give me until Mr.-Shug-burgh’s Scheme is ripe for executioOi '
Yet, Surely, no bad confequence could attenti my yielding to the strong impulfe of my curio-fity. — It is impoffible but the over-grown creature might amufe himfelf for one half hour at least, amongst a fetof lively girls, without my pref ence.—I believe I shall try the-experiment in all events.
Most dearly, Dolly, have I paid for my folly and impatience.- I am unacquainted with parti- -eulars;—but learnt enough to convince me that Patty is a woman of birth and fortune, and a near relation of this vile Smith’s, who has been gaping for the honour of my hand.^ I admired myfelf for my policy, in making an appointment with him for the morning’s walk. He propofed the Park ; but 1 told him it must rather be a morning of bufinefs than amufement; for that i must go a shopping, and he should-at-i tend me.
I called at Several milliners in our way (0 Dartmouth-street, and affected to enquire for a ribbon to match a bit of filk I had with me :— none could accommodate me, and we foon reached Mrs. Trueman’s, who no fooner heard my voice, than she ran to inform me that Mifs Patty v/as impatient- to fee me.
Mr. Smitffs back was towards her at this in-
L 5	stantj—T-
226 The HISTORY of
starxt; — he turned abruptly upon her—with a strange wild countenance, — “ And I too, (he “ cried) am equally impatient to See Mifs Patty.”
Down she dropped at his Sect in a dreadful Swoon.
‘‘ Come, come, Sweetheart, (faid the hard-“ natured wretch, difregarding Mrs, Trueman’s condition) conduft us immediately to her.” The girl he Spoke to, officioufly obeyed. He took my hand, — I trembled with apprehenSion of I knew not what; but was compelled to follow our indifcreet condu£trefs into the diningroom.
Patty lifted up her eyes, as the door opened, —^her colour forfook her—•
My dear Mifs Kennington, (faid she, calm-ly) have ruined me for ever!”
Ten thoufand blessings on this hour ! (cried Smith) Mifs Sommervile is found ! After all my frultlefs Search, dropped into my very mouth ; nor Snail she henceforth, elude my ** vigilance. My Sweetest coustn, am I ever to behold an averted afpedt ?” rc If you have any humanity, (cried she) my dear madam; do not leave me to the mercy of this man 1”
‘‘ A pretty jest, faith ! (returned Smith) am ** I not the properest perfcn to reStore the fugi-tive 1 your father has a right to expefl; that favour at my hands.” You must excufe me, Mifs Kennington ; a chair shall be Sent for, “ to convey you home; for I cannot hazard “ the lofs of fo newly-recovered and So valuable a prize, on any consideration.”
« Oh,
»
Miss S G M M E R V I L E. 227
«<■ Oh, Mr. Shugburgh I (exclaimed the af-fli6ted girl) my best, my only friend, that I ‘‘ had but listened to your advice,—I should have efcaped this greatest of evils!”
Distradiion ! (cried Smith, looking horribly) (( —What fellow does-she mean ? Is it your old Shugburgh, Mifs Kennington ?”—“ It is. Sir, (returned I.)” He grinned with pleafure ! a — He is too crazy a champion, (refumed he) for So important a caufe; but, madam, v/ould you pleafe to have a chair ?”
“ Why, really. Sir, you are very genteel, (Said I) to attempt turning me out of a houSe where, I prefume, you have as little autho-rity as myfelf: I must, therefore, beg your 'pardon for I shall not leave Mifs Price without good and Sufficient reafons.”
“ Price I (repeated he, with a Sneer) So that is your travelling name, madam ! — Sir Ed-“ ward Sommervile will be very proud to hear “ of all your proceedings/’
“ I fuppofe, Mifs Kenningtoft, (continued he) it cannot be neceffary to procure your ab-“ fence, to give you any further information “ than that I am that Lady’s very near relation, “ and will most certainly convey her fafe to her «« much-astlidled and injured father.”
“ Madam, (Said Mrs. Trueman, opening the “ door) do not pay the least regard to what that man fays; — he is a cruel enemy !”
“ Be Silent, woman, (cried he sternly) unleSs “ you will bear v/itnefs to the truth; am I not—”
“ I have Sent for Mr. Shugburgh, (returned “ Mrs. Trueman, with an air of exultation) and “ I now hear him upon the stairs; you will find
it
2z8 The HISTORY of
it no eaSy matter to Silence him on a wrong foundation.”
The good man instantly appeared ; but I am So fatigued with the Scene, and the reeoUeflion of it is fo painful to me, that I must have fome rest before I enter into the recital of it. I am most unhappy to have occastoned ;—but I will tell you all by the next post, and am, &c.
S. Kennington.
LETTER LVL
From the Same to the Same.
SMITH affected to Smile upon Mr. Shug-burgh. I have no doubt, fir, (faid he) but you are too well-bred to interfere in any buSinefs that does not concern you. That lady thought proper. Some few months ago, to elope from her father Sir Edward Sommervile, ** who has been inconfolable ever Since. I have the honour, as you well-know, to be nephew to that gentleman ; and, in order to relieve his anxiety, have Spared neither labour nor expence to dilcover her hiding-place. But, “ in vain, that woman (pointing to Mrs. True-man) is the rebel’s encourager and Support. ** She formerly lived in the family ; but was ** discharged for Some mifdemeanor, and has wandered to this place, I fuppofe to Shelter ** herfelf from pumshment. Judge, then, (con-
tinued
jMiss S O M M E R V I L E. 229
tinue'd he) if she is a proper perfon to be trust-^ -with the care of a young lady she has e-“ vidently Seduced from her friends, and would incite to continue for ever at variance with them.”
“ My dear madam, (Said Mr. Shugburgh, unmindful of this fine harangue) I loved and esteemed you from our first acquaintance : my protedlion has been frequently offered unfoli- -cited ; nor had I a wish beyond Serving and Saving you from distrefs and difficulties.”
“ You hear this gentleman’s tale ; he cannot be offended at, my not paying implicit faith " to all he relates ;—you best know your own “ affairs;—if it is with your approbation.”
Do not once mention it, fir; (Said she)— there is no calamity I would not chearfully ‘‘ embrace to avoid falling again in to his power I “ ——How unfortunate that I delayed acquainting you with my family!—but the apprehenfion “ of being delivered up to that wretch!—He “ is, fir, the most enterprifing and hypocri-tical—”
Obliging creature! (cried he, with Some exultation). What rage can equal that of a difappointed woman!—but neither your idle “ distrefs, nor this gentleman’s extravagant hu-“ manity, shall avail you!—'You must to Eng-land.”
“ I was far from intending to quit this coun-“ try, at prefent, (Said Mr. Shugburgh, fini-“ ling) but my dear little friend shall not go « without me. The father of this lady, fir, cannot be offended at my zeal. I have, with- , in thefe four-and-twenty hours, delivered her ‘‘ from one extremity, and will not behold her
“ plunged
230 The history of
plunged, perhaps, into a greater, without “ alTisting her. Let us, therefore, (added the good man) a6t in concert, Mr. Smith, as we “ have both the fame objedl in view, Mifs Som-mervile’s happinefs, I never yet forfeited my ‘‘ word; and, unlefs juftified by your conducf, “ will not take a step without you.”
A pretty whimstcal propoSition ! (returned Smith) however, str, I shall not oppofe fo powerful a party. We wist all go together, if you pleafe, my little-intended, the fweet “ Mifs Kennington—Patty’s agent, the wife Mrs, ‘‘ Trueman — her prote<Sor, the officious Mr. “ Shugburgh,—and her cruel profecutor, the odious Mr. Smith! — (I think 1 have be-stowed the proper epithets.)'—But Mis. True-‘‘ man, you must lodge me ; for I whll not quit “ your houfe till we embark.”
“ Your family will be finely increafed then, madam; (faid Mr. Shugburgh) for I am de-termined to follow fo excellent an example.” —You may, Mifs Kennington, (added he, with the utmost kindnefs) fafely trust your “ friend to my care,—and make what excufe you pleafe for my abfence.—I do not wish to “ palliate on ray own account : in fo good a caufe “ we can never be too bufy, Mr. Smith, in “ well-doing.”
Smith sheered, and with an amazing confidence drew his chair dole to Patty, whole coun-' tenance befpoke the utmest perplexity and anguish.
I knew not how to ad; Mrs. Trueman’s eyes intreated my stay, Patty kept hers fixed / upon the ground,. Mr. Shugburgh was lost in
meditation,
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 231
meditation, whilil; the hardened Smith Seemed to enjoy the general distre s and confusson !
Not a word pasted for Some time :—at length, Mr. Shiigburgh recolledfing himfelf. Said “ I ‘‘ am Sorry, MiSs Kennington, we are under a ‘‘ necessity of loSmg your company;—but your “ uncle will be uneaSy,—and you See we are “ none of us difpofed to be Social.—Perhaps, if you can contrive to look in upon us in the evening, we may have overcome our chagrin, “ and—
I arofe immediately.—Patty burst into tears; but did not attempt to detain me.
“ No ceremony, (Said Smith, Sarcastically) « —Mifs Kennington is no friend to ceremony: we are all upon honour, and will have no “ private conferences.”
Mrs, Trueman rang the bell, and the fame young woman attended me to my chair that was So unhappily forward in leading us into the Scene we had been engaged in.—Where it will end is beyond my utmost conception.
My Lord Kennington was in one of his over-pettish humours, and gave me but an indifferent reception. I told him the gentlemen had met with Some unexpedfed company, and bade me apologize.—■
“ It is very fine, (cried he)—people have no ‘‘ consideration but for themfelves;—indifpofed, low-fpirited,—a pretty entertainingcompanion “ they have Sent me!—and Lady Sarah, too, has contrived to be abffnt 1”
What a profpecl; of felicity for me! The dinner was Served up.
My heart depreffed, my appetite lost, I apprehended his Lordship’s Severest difpleaSure
would
232 The HISTORY of
would every instant break forth. He helped me to feveral things :—the plate was Sent away in' the fame condition 1 received it ; his eyes met mine :—I was confufed ;—a stern rebuke was poor encouragement to recover myfelf; nor do I know a fituation on earth I should not have thought preferable to the ope I was then in. Thefervants withdrawn, he yawned, “ Muftc has charms to.footh'a—We will try the ex-perimentL What fay you, Mrs. Sarah, to ** oblige me with a Soft tune to harmonize my at prefent dissatisfied foul. I will recline on « this couch, forget my forlorn state,—and,--i£ , ** poffible, your—stupidity	‘
I played to the unmerciful tyrant for three Succeeding hours, when, out of compassion to > my own wearinefs, I ventured to defist, though I expe6led a Smart reprimand would be- the con- -Sequence.
I Soon found, however, that 1 had nothing to ' fear ; for I had So literally fulfilled his defire of harmonizing his fenfes, that he was fallen into a profound steep, which continued till Supper* time.
I should not be So prolix on*fo tristing a fub* je£l, Dolly, but in order to make you fenfible that every state of mortification has its advantage ; for my Lord’s fellow, immediately on my noiSe ceafing, tapt at the door, and delivered me . a note from Mr. Shugburgh, which I would not, for the world, his Lordship should have Seen; nor could any other than the incident I have related. Secured it from examination,-The good man '.nforms me, that Smith per-fists in his difagreeable behaviour, and So cloScly watches himj that he is unable to exchange one
private
t
I
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 233
private word with Patty :—the reaSon of which he very naturally concludes, is the preventing her from giving •him his true chara£ter. He wishes it was poffible for me to get to the Speech of Mrs. Trueman ; but fears it will be as little pra6ticable as the other.
Never was there So inSolent and over-bearing a creature as Smith, nor fo helplefs and deplorable a creature as I am.
My Lord awaked with astonishment I--------
How’s this, Sarah ? (faid he) you must be a << powerful musscian to Subdue fuch faculties as^ ** mine.—Have I been long asteep?”
“ Some hours, my Lord.”
Ah, la barbarel (exclaimed he, shrugging « his shoulders) and fo pretty a foul attending ** me !—but you are a most egregious dull one!
—(added he) and; therefore it is no refledfion. “ Had you but half your beauty, as I have fre-quently obferved to you, with a tolerable de-“ cent share of vivacity, you would be a thou-‘‘ Sand times more eligible. I will leave you, « however, to your meditations, and follow ‘‘ Lady Sarah.—I shall be early enough to take ‘‘ two or three chapters in the history of the “ four kings ; — therefore, a good evening to> “ you.”
Thus, releafed from perfeeution, I flew to my pen, and, to relieve my own breast, must be troublefome to you. Yet, my dear, I know you will not only lament the caufe, but grieve for the efledl.^—I shall have a dreadful night of it ; nor will the uncertainty of my own affairs fail to aggravate my heart-felt afflidfion.
lam, &c. S. Kennington.
L E r-
\
234 The HISTORY of
LETTER LVII.
From the Same to the Same.
At fix o’clock, this morning, my dear, a girl from Mrs. Trueman’s loaded with: band boxes, entered my apartmentL
My mistreSs, (faid fhe) madam, was de-“ termined to be pundtual, and hopes you will “ approve of what she has now fent you.” Mrs. Brett having heard thus far, was fo civil as to trust us together, not in the least fufpedi-ing (as many preparations of the kind are going forv/ards) her errand had a further meaning j but I had better hopes.
The moment we had an opportunity, she gave a long letter from Mifs Sommervile—and, notwithstanding all my impatience to make my-felf acquainted with its contents, 1 was compelled (for fear of being Surprized) to flip it into my pocket unopened, and turn over a heap of fenfelefs finery, which I beheld as vanity^ and felt to be 'vexation of Spirit.
Due time having elapfed to cover the inno--cent deceit, I uifpatched her with a good grace, and. Securing my door, 1 drew out Patty’s epistle, and read as follows:
Mifs Sommervile to Mifs Kennimgton.
“ BELIEVE me, my dear Mifs Rennington, *♦ that events are by no means within the power
“ of
Miss SOMMER VILE. 235
** of mortality. To Some it is appointed to be the instrument of good to their fellow-crea-“ tures, tho’ contrary to their wifhes and in-tentions;—and to others, of evil, however repugnant to their natures and inclinations: the latter of which, the calamity you have “ So innocently brought upon me, is a recent “ and most convincing proof —and where the hand of providence is confpicuous, murmur-“ ings must not be heard.
“ Elad I proceeded with lefs caution, I had ** been more Secure; but where liberty and “ life is in danger, every apprehensson will be alive.
‘‘ The first commencement of our acquain-tance, fo Singular ; the dilstovery of my Situa-tion at Mrs, Trueman’s, So premature, had I given you the particulars I now mean to lay before you, would you not have required “ Some farther testimony than my bare relation ? ** I iim convinced, however, your tender un-SuSpe£fing heart might have been diSpoSed on “ fuch an occafion, the malice of Lady Sarah would have wrought my destrudtion.—The “ day has, indeed been procrastinated ; but ‘‘ could not be erazed from the book of fate I “ Smith did not deceive you, when he told you I was Sir Edward Sommervile’s daugh-ter ; but he claims a degree of conSanguinity to that gentleman he does not stand in. It is “ a hard talk for a child to paint the author of “ her existence in guilty colours 1 but justice, felf-preServation, and integrity compel me to ‘‘ perform it. Read, then, my fweet friend, “ what I So fatally reServed for your ear.
“ Sir
23ff The HSS T O R Y of
Sir Edward was the last remaining heir of ** the Sommerviles> and had the misfortune to “ lofe both father and mother at an early peri-od ; a misfortune that I have reafon ever, to “ deplore.
“ His grand-mother (w-hofe extravagant fond-nefs for him, in all probability, laid the foun-“ dation of every error he has fallen into) un-*^ dertook the eare of his infancy. Her child “ should not be tormented with the common methods of education;, he should have a com-panion to play him into learning, and what “ genius and emulation could not effedl, flog-** ging never should. —Thus, in order to Save him from Salutary corredtion, she delivered him up to the tyranny of a perverfe and tur-bulent will.
“ Having run through every cruel and idle folly his age was capable of, his companiony-“ at length introduced him into vicious Scenes. “ One MiSs Smith, a girl in the neighbour-hood, became his partner in ini.quity, who brought him a Son Some few months before he was nineteen.
He rejoiced exceedingly in his birth, gave ** him his own name, and declared he would give him his estate likewiSe.
“ Their criminal intercourse continued Some years: he had Seveial other children ; but they all died young: nor did the mother long Survive them.
“ At three-and-thirty my mother unfortu* nately took his fancy.—His estate was an un-deniable recommendation with a family that ‘‘ could boast of little more than a bare compe*-
‘‘ tence;
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 237
‘‘ tence; eSpeci-lly as it was inheritable, no lefs “ by male than female issue.
She he^rd but little of the man, his houSe, his equipage, his great professions not fuffer-‘‘ ing much niention to be made of him ; in Ihort, they talked her into the match, not-“ withstanding ambition was, by no means her “ most prevailing inclination ; and she foon ex-“ perienced how unavailing the power of riches is where shappinefs is wanting.
Sir Edward affeO;ed to profeSs the highest regard for her, even when he treated her with “ the utmost barbarity; nor did her giving him a daughter, in any degree, mitigate her fuf-ferings.
The darling boy (now ssxteen) took the alarm I — Sir Edward’s affedtions would be weaned: from him by my Lady’s artful ma-nagement; nor would any thing lefs Satisfy ‘‘ him than being introduced into the family as a relation of fome kind.
Sir'Edward was unable to deny Neddy’s modest request, and he was accordingly im-“ pofed upon by my mother for his Sister’s Son. She Saw fo little company, and her fcnow-ledge of his connedtions vvere fo limited, that she had no opportunity of being undeceived; eSpeciaHy as to give the better colour to the deception, she was told his father and mother died abroad.
No being was ever more wicked than this lad ; yet Sir Edward would not fee it: it was “ jealoufy ! it was malice !—My mother conss-** dered him as a Spy, and wanted him removed. As for my part, I beheld him with terror for the first twelve years of my life (as he was
« ever
238 The HISTORY of
« ever torturing and tormenting me) when, all of a Sudden, he began to affefii; a wonderful kindnefs for me, and would go no-where with-“ out Patty.
My mother obferved this change with plea-Sure, until I was near fifteen ;—when Ihe be-«« came alarmed, at his increafing assiduity, and often remonstrated with Sir Edward on its im-“ propriety. Their opinions, however, distent-ed on this as well as every other occaSion ; — she was an unreasonable woman, and nothing would Satisfy her.—Poor Ned, he was always too officious or too negligent.
We lived in a kind of Splendid captivity, « and were feidom Seen out of our own park or gardens, except at church.
“ I had only one acquaintance upon earth at my fchool-intervals,—the parfon’s daughter; but she was, perhaps, the most ufeful ac-quaintance the whole earth could have fur-nished me with.
“ She taught me to chufe the best authors for my amufement, corredied my judgment, and improved my principles.—She first made me ** fenSible of Sir Edward’s bafe defigns; and to < ‘ her Superior knowledge I am indebted for the years of innocence I have pasted.
My mother, borne down by dejedfion, liv-‘‘ ed only to fee me Sixteen,—when she was re-“ leafed from the most cruel bondage,— that of the Soul.
“ She had been buried only a few months, before my father intimated that he bad Some thoughts, as he Scarcely knew which he lov-ed best, Patty or Edward, to give both an equal right to his estate.
« I
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 239
I confeSs 1 did not understand him; but my “ fine coufin Soon explained the matter, by ac~ tually propofing himfelf, for my lover.
I was shocked and Surprized; but did not fly out upon the occafion, as I was far from ap-prehending (fo odious was his general charac-ter) that my father could countenance fuch an enormity !
My friend, MiSs Stainshy, had long fiifpedl-ed his intentions, and enjoined me in the most “ folemn manner to make her acquainted with the earliest overtures.
I did So; but how shall I deScribe my hor-«« ror and astonishment, when she informed me “ we were brother and fister !
The more I reflefled on every circum-“ stance, the more I was convinced she did not deceive me ; but if I had entertained a doubt, “ she took the most effectual method to remove ittaking me to his nurie.
“ The woman had been reduced to the great-est‘’extremities, and, in vain, applied to Sir “ Edv/ard for relief, for having stightly difob« liged him;—-which fo incenfed her, that, out of revenge, she came privately to my mother, and revealed the whole affair.
“ This step anfw^ered her purpoSe, tho’ not her « expectations: she obtained afiistance, but was forbid, on the forfeiture of all future favour, << to tell her tale to any other perfon, except Mifs Stainshy, who, by my mother’s direction wrote down every particular.
“ The reafon, (Said that dear relation) of ray « proceeding in this rnanner, is my apprehen-(Ions for my child. I am no stranger either to the wickednefs of the Son’s heart, or the In-
“ fluence
****."^	*
240	The history of
fluence he possesses with his father. I do hope Sir Edward has too much confcience to ‘‘ conSent to incest; but he may be taken a-« way, and Patty innocently drawn into So great an evil.—He is a wretch ; but his artifice and “ addrefs might delude a youthful heart into a more tolerable opinion, nor could I die In “ peace if I omitted one precaution to avert liich unnatural infamy.”
“ Judge of my feelings under thefe convifli-ons. I shuddered at his approach; — and, “ with regard to Sir Edward,—! cannot fpeak “ my horror.
Things continued much in the fame fitua-tion until I was turned eighteen, when they began to wear the face of preparation :—my « father (publickly in r.is own family, at leaft) talking of Edward’s changing his name by « a€l of parliament, fome short time before his
marriage with-----1 cannot finish the dread-!*
ful fentence.
“ I was returning one evening from a me-lancholy walk in the park, when in an unluc-‘‘ ky moment Smith came acroSs me, and was particularly troublefome. Unable to reSift ** his rude attempts to kiSs me, and no lefs un-able to endure the difgust thofe attempts oc-cafioned me, I was weak enough to acknow-“ ledge that I knew him for what he was.
“ I found my error when it was too late; he had novy no meafures to keep with me, but repeated, nay, increafed his brutality; and what might have been the confequence I dare “ not think, if a strange gentleman had not by “ accident strolled into the park, and given me an opportunity of efcaping.
I was
Miss SOMMERVILE. 241
“ I was So terrified at his behaviour, that, without a moment’s refledtion, I flew to « Mifs Stainfby, and told her what had hap-“ pened.
“ I pity you, my dear Mifs Sommervile, (Said she) and would adviSe you ; but I fear you want refolution.”—
“ What! to avoid incest !” demanded I.
Well, my good girl (faid she) we will put it to the test.—I know the diabolical princi-pie your father a<5ts upon ; but it is too per-nicious to trust a young mind with.—This is “ your hour of deliverance; — if you re-enter ‘‘ that houfe, you are lost for ever !”
‘‘ No words can exprefs what I experienced; —I looked upon her as my guardian-angel, and was impatient to execute whatever she might prefcribe.
“ You remember Hannah, (refumed flie) that lived ten years with your mother, and was “ difcharged merely to mortify and grieve her; —she is now a widow, and keeps a milliner’s shop in Dublin.
« —We have always correfponded, and I could trust my life in her hands.
“ With her you may depend on the kindest “ reception, and most friendly proteSion ”
I had but two guineas about me, and not one change of drefs ; I neverthelefs refolved to abandon every thing in fuch a caufe.
She produced her little hoard, which a-mounted to treble the Sum of 'mine, and hav-“ ing accommodated me with linen and an out-“ fide covering (but little known in the neigh-“ bourhood) we fet out together for the town at about three miles distance, where coaches and VoL. II.	M	“ waggons
242 The HISTORY of
waggons continually baited in their way to London.
“ Fortunately for me, there was a mourn-ing-coach ready to leave the door ; I took a hasty farewel of my tender friend, and with my Small pittance arrived Safe the next even-ing at Charing-croSs: the following morning, the Chester-machine conveyed me, with the “ utmost expedition, many miles on my journey to that city. I enquired the cheapest way of travelling to Dublin, and was advifed to go to Holyhead, as the pacquet could pafs and ‘‘ repaSs with a Side-wind only, whilst paflen-gers remained at a very great expence at “ Parkgate.
Thus, my dear madam, was I cast in your way, and I dare believe you will think the con-“ duft I obferved highly necessary in my cir-‘‘ cumstances. I have received Several letters “ from Mifs Stainfby, which never failed to in-timidate me, and confirm me in my relblution, “ of concealing my family ; for the monfter has been frequently heard to declare, that he will hazard his neck to prevent my marrying any other perSon.
What then have I not to apprehend from “ fo defperate a villain I — if Lord Finly’s ap-probation- was to reach his knowledge, one or both of us wmu’ld be Surely Sacrificed.—Had I not, therefore. Sufficient reafon to—but, adieu to Lord Finly and every hope; for, unlefs Smith may be permitted to convey me to my “ father for his own purpofes, you may depend upon it he will destroy me.
Mr. Shtigburgh is the most extraordinary ‘‘ man I ever met with ; he watches over me
“ with
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 243
with an affection truly benevolent, and should “ any accident befal him, on my account, I could not Survive it.
“ Convey this letter to him, to apprize him at once of my danger and his own : — accept my best thanks for past kindnefs, and tenderest “ wishes for your happinefsmy heart tells me we shall never meet again.
I am, &c.
M. SOMMERVILE.”
Have I not reaSon, Dolly, to be affli6l:ed beyond meaSure I afflifted at occafioning Such mi-fery to fo good a girl ! I can never fupport any misfortune that may befal her!
How has she been treated, perfecuted, infult-ed ! what mean privileges do the mighty assume I Lady Sarah, that could read the little tradeswoman in every action, after she had discovered her Situation, must defcend, though with ever So ill a grace.
We should not be premature in our judgment of strangers ; many that appear great, are not fo •in reality ; whilst others, like the diamond, wear their lustre beneath the Surface.
I must find Some Safe'conveyance for this letter : if it falls into wrong hands, poor Mifs Som-mervile — but she shall have no farther reafon to hate your. Site.	S. Kennington.
M 2	L E T-
544 The HISTORY of
\
LETTER LVIII.
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
«
The murder, my dear Harry, is, at length, out; and Patty, Price no lefs a perfon than Sir Edward Sommervile’s daughter, the heireSs oS feven thouSand a year.
Who would have imagined that So strange a beast should be the father of fuch a girl ? but many extraordinary things happen in life, or I should never have forgot Ned Smith, and his ill charaSer.
I have heard Lady Sommervile was a very deserving woman, notwithstanding all the ill-treatment she met with ; nor had Sir Edward’s jealous fit any other foundation than his hopeful nephew’s malice.
You fee a knowledge of the world, or being born in an alSembly-room, is not essential to po-litenefs; for this young Lady’s education, as well as her life, must have been a very confined one ; as was most strongly exemplified, indeed, in her odd choice of a milliner’s shop for a hiding-place! — Poor creature ! it was very shallow!
But she is in a difmal fituation at prefent; that great Smith, Bob’s rival and her tormentor, has taken her prifoner, and ‘.prefuming upon feme little relationship, is for carrying her off nokns volens.
But
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 245
But the tar has happily blocked up the garri-Son, and will not abandon it but at the lass extremity ; he is an honess fellow for fending us the enclofed, and shall not want the aflissance he requires.
Mr. Shugburgh to Mr. Bradshaw.
Sir,
‘‘ EVERY thing is cleared up refpe6Ung Patty’s virtue ; but her calamities feem to “ increafe.
“ She is fallen into dreadful hands! but you “ muss proceed cautioussy: a good caufe re-“ quires only refolution and difcretion to defend “ and Support it. own it is with Some diffi-culty that even I myfelf obferve the modera-“ tion I recommend ; nor am I infenSible of the “ warmth of youth ; but you would dessroy what you wish to Save ; a confideration that muss infallibly ressrain you.
I have been able to obtain only piece-meal “ intelligence. She is Sir Edward Sommervile’s “ daughter, a man who possesses neither honour “ nor principle, or he would never have expofed “ So Sweet a child to the dangers and difficulties “ she has encountered, merely to avoid an un-“ natural union with that tall Smithj Lord Ken-nington was pleafed tochufe for a hushand for his niece, in preference of your worthy friend. “ He calls himfelf Sir Edward’s nephew; but I wish he is not a nearer relation r and, in or-“ der to reconcile you to the unjustifiable vio-lence he would pra^iife, with regard to for-cing Patty to England, tells you ** Sir Edward " would rather he should enjoy his estate than
M3	any
246 The history of
any other man; and, therefore, propofes fo ‘‘ give him his daughter.”
“ Mifs Sommervile was fo terrified at the ap-prehenSion of my withdrawing my protedion ** from Some provoking epithets that villain has “ bellowed upon me, of officious bufy fellow, &c. that she is unmindful.of all referve, and “ publickly declares Smith is her brother,
** 1 have heard of many bafe practices in life-“ but I rejoice that .this is the only, horrid in-“ stance that ever reached my knowdedge of a ‘‘ father’s delivering up his child to known incest. But, whatever may be the father’s ** inclinations, it is evident that daring wretch will not let her eaSily efcape him.
“ I am well-convinced that Lord Finly and you have a great affe61ion for her.—Old men are not fo Soon impofed upon, as young ones imagine. — Every objasdion is now removed, “ and if her, agreeable perfon and valuable un* derstanding were fufficient to engage your at-tachment, it will not be dissolved by the know-** ledge of her fortune.
‘‘ It would be my advice, that the most fa-voured gentleman fhould become her legal protefilor ; the authority, the very name of a hust)and, must be capable of awing fueh a “ reptile into proper behaviour.
You know what I have undertaken on Mifs « Kennington’s part, from a convidion that it “ is the only means of preferving her from fuf-« fering. I would gladly perform the fame oh fice by her lovely friend, and at the fame pe^-** riod too, if all parties were agreeable. — She is now a clofe prifoner at Mrs. Trueman’s: I “ think it would be dangerous to trust her with
** a wretch
Mies SOMMER VILE. 247
a wretch who has neither honour nor mercy, “ or I would meet you at the tavern in the “ next' street to be more explicit. If you can contrive to fend Mifs Kennington, she will be “ a restraint upon him ; and it is certain he can-“ not convey her violently from a houfe fo well inhabited,.without lome noife.
“ Mifs Kennington’s appearance shall be the ‘‘ stgnal of your readinefs, and I will join you ' immediately. l am. &c.
Shugburgii.”
What wretches 1 but I will be calm.—a curious rogue, this fame Smith : we have long been in his debt, according to Bob’s account; nor shall he efcape payment.
People are not So private in their iniquity as they imagine ; fori, myfelf have heard it whif-pered, that this fellow is a nearer relation of Sir Edward’s, than he is difpofed to claim.—^Feace to fuch men, I fay ! if Such men can have peace !
Could you but give a peep at us it would divert you. This letter has produced wonderful effects.—Bob’s face is covered with Smiles.— Finly fmirks like your honour, at the corners of his mouth; nor am I fo narrcw-fouled as to envy either the one or the other.
But did you obferve the sty Shugburgh : You both love her ; I would advife the most “ favoured gentleman.”—Ah ! my friend, if you have had Sufficient penetration to difeover the formerj you cannot be ignorant of the latter;
, -—the poor Bradshaw !—But I have done witst every folly I
I most certainly am a very clever fellow.— Patty low-born! howl Scorned the abfurdity I and
M 4	yet
248 The HISTORY of
yet her father is as mean and unworthy a rast cal as ever 'lived -but as we Sung in our opera,
Geld from vice can take out a sting.”
How wife the good man is! fend Mifs Ken-nington to relieve me!—-A very pretty fubstitute! What could Mifs Kenninglon do, I trow, in opposition to fuch a Goliath ? One of us, at least, Shall remain in the stop to Support her, if required. What can he have further to fay on this head ?---Articles of capitulation from the Lady. —- Nay, then, happy Finly, the day is your own I	^
We have had our meeting, and have concluded on meafures. Mr. Shugburgh is of opinion that Patty’s apprehenstons are too strong, with regard to Smiths defperate difposttion; he inststs upon it that cowards encounter only the weak ; (and is not Smith’s charaQier Sufficiently marked ?) therefore. Lord Finly can have nothing to fear, if he can prevail upon her to accept of him.
There was a time, Harry—but Finly and I are perfedlly reconciled; nor will I give fuch an ugly likenefs of human nature,-—as not to be capable of participating my friend’s joy and yet, how well I loved—my heart bears faithful testimony.
The wedding-day is to be the day of our departure ; for, when once Mifs Kennington absconds, we stall have no time to fofe.
Flis whimfical Lordstip conceives that Shugburgh and Smith (from an equivocal note the former Sent him) are strolled into the country, and is hourly expefling their return.—-But they
never
Miss S O M M E R VI L E. 249
, never will return again; at least, upon their uSual footing.
We (hall be a fine party. Lord, and heyho, Harry! Lady—-Finly ! Mr. and Mrs. Fleet-wood, Mr. Shugbuigh, Mr. Bradshaw, and Mrs. Trueman.
—Her decampment will, indeed be most necessary, as there would be no standing, against Smith’s fury, when we are once out of his reach. I am, &c.	F. Bradshaw.
^--------------------o——---------------
L E T T E R LIX.
Lcrd Finly to MiSs Sommervili:, -Dear Madam;-
1' Hope you will do me the justice to believe ■ that the diScovery of your family and con-fequence has no other value in my fight, than as I flatter myfelf it will induce you to declare your intentions refpeSting me. How well I have loved you ; what cruel constraint I have put ‘ upon' my inclination, in forbearing perSonally to tell you So; and how ardently I have wished for the blessing of your hand, is not within the reach of language!
There is an enthufiafm in the foft friendship you have infpired me with, that experience a-lone can give us an idea of! I never remember-ed-my advantages of birth or fortune, but when I was planning fonoe little Scheme of amufe-
M 5	ment
250 The HISTORY of
merit for my Patty ; nor felt their infufficiency and inconvenience but from the recolledtion that ste defpifed them ; and I found that fplendorand happinefs were in danger of being difunited by your over-valuation of the one, and wrong judgment of the other. I am, by no means, much read in romance; therefore, it is evident, however foreign to reafon, that extravagant fuggef-tions are the offspring of love. I have not for many weeks beheld a cottage that has not furnished my imagination with a thoufand pleafing flights! nor efpied a Silly sheep-fold, but all Arcadia was before me. I mull: acknowledge that when I considered you as merely indebted to nature for every grace, you was more the objed of my admiration than under your prefent circumstances : the confcioufnefs of fortune communicates either a true or falfe dignity to every heart! and the conduct you obferved, fufficient-ly evinces your feelings.
But, notwithstanding my strong fenSibility of your every perfection, I determined, in conformity to that humility that was your chofen characteristic, to fupprefs all profession of it, at lead, until I had fo far conciliated your esteem, that you would rather believe yourfelf the most lovely of your fex, than doubt my Sincerity.
If you will pleafe to recolleCt the first letter I prefumed to fend you, you must allow that I mod religiousty adhered to my refolution ; but I now conSider mylelf as releafed from every felf-in-junClion, and would most certainly Suffer my pen to wanton in your praife, if I was not asap-prehenS.ve, at this period, of offending by my impertinence, as formerly by non-compliarxe with your modest humour.
When
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 251
When I read the flattering part of that letter, that gave me hope, only to increafe my defpair,
. and refle6t how incapable you must be of deceiving, I am tempted to renounce every rifing doubt. But Mr. Shugburgffs opinion will have more weight with you than ten thoufand arguments.—He approves, he promotes, he advifes our union—nor will the voice of friendship be unattended to, however the pleadings of the lover might be difregarded.
On his interest, therefore, I rely : If the ten-derest—fool that I am,—yet—I will Subdue this prating propensity, and fubmit my caufe to him and you. It was, indeed, from the abundance of my heart that I began to write; and it is that very abundance that obliges me to defist;— even the tongue of volubility cannot keep pace with the fancy ; much lefs the pen with the o-verflowings of the foul I
I am, ,&c.	Finly.
----------- -----o-------------------^
LETT E R ' LX.
'	1
Mifs KENNiNGTON to Mifs Carey.
Little did I conceive it poflible, my dear Dolly, to pafs an unfatisfa6lory afternoon with Mifs Sommervile; but I had the mortification, yesterday, to find that all poflibi-lity is not comprehended in my narrow conception.
I had a note conveyed into my drefling-room
by
252 The history of
by an unknown hand, intreating my company at Mrs. Trueman’s, another circumstance that I had no idea could happen to me,—being linked in intriguesbut I have Several upon my hands at this very jundiure ; and, upon my word, for a fhy innocent girl, acquit myfelf to a miracle!
My Lord, and Lady Sarah were engaged at the Castle ; (a place from whence I am excluded until I become Mrs. Smith ; you may therefore, judge of the violent deSire I have to go) which favoured my wisties; and I ventured to Set forth the instant their carriage drove from the door.
I found Patty’s Spirits but little improved;— Smith looked like himfelf, confident and audacious ; and Mr. Shugburgh Smiled alternately upon his little friends, as if to communicate a ' hope of deliverance to their hearts.
Mrs. Trueman, with a pale apprehenfive countenance, appeared at tea.—Smith viewed her contemptuousty :—his foul is incapable of entering into the Sentiment that goodneSs and great-neSs are the fame thing.
“ It is a most w'himfical life, (Said Mr. Shug-burgh) that we lead at preSent, from want of confidence in each other: I may be wrong; but I think there is much leSs hazard in truft-ing to a generous mind, than provoking it by ill treatment.—I do not, however, expedl every one should be of my opinion, and, therefore, “ con\ply with the humour of my company.
Had Mr. Smith but for a moment relaxed his ** vigilance, I should not have Scrupled to have given him whole hrurs with Mifs Sommer-vile ; but as he has thought proper to confider “ me in a fufpicious light, I will take care to ** be equally Secure, and will embrace the oppor-
tmiity
Miss SOMMERVILE. 253
tunity of a third perfon’s prefence, to abfent “ myfelf for a short period. Mifs Kennington, (added he, nodding in a friendly manner) you will let me have the pleaSure of finding you “ here at my return.”
I bowed, — Smith sheered—Patty and Mrs. Trueman Sighed,—and Mr. Shugburgh departed.
What a rough poSitive hunks it is! (faid Smith.) Does he think I should eat my fair “ couSin up, if the little Mifs Kennington did “ not stand in the way ? — O’my conScience, “ fuch a cormorant might devour both the one “ and the other with very little difficulty, and ‘‘ the lean Mrs. Trueman into the bargain.”
He laughed at his own wit, and feemed to be Secure of our private applauSe.
Come, come (refumed he) you need be ** under no restraint before me: — I will be ** deaf, blind, any thing, every thing to pleafe the ladies, and obtain your favour,” endeavouring to take Mifs Sommervlle’s hand.
“ If obtaining my favour (replied she) was in any degree the wish of your heart, you wouKl not purfue Such odious meafures.—A pretty device to engage a woman’s favour by break-“ ing her heart!”
Ah ! (cried he) Richard for that coufin.— « Lbey’ll bendy indeed; hut he mujl jirain that eracks them.—Shakefpeareknevv human, or ra-“ ther female, nature, to a nicety.”
His charadiers, fir, (Said Mifs Sommervile) were all strongly marked ;— a villain, for ex-ample.—You was lamenting last night that mine would be a history without an historian ; << and I think you are a charader without a
poei
254 The HISTORY of
poet to take you off. ShakeSpeare and Shake-Speare’s pen alone could do you justice.”
“ I will kifs you for that, (refumed he) my “ lovely Satirical girl, though I stiould never kifs you more.—They might well fay, (con-tinned he) Revenge is Sweet, if every offen-“ der was to fare as yourfelf, and every offen-‘‘ ded perfon as daring as your Smith.”
Poor Patty, I believe Sorely repented her biting retort.
“ It is now my pretty little Mifs Kenning-** ton’s turn, (faid he) to give me a l.andfome “ stroke. 1 challenge you, madam, and am “ prepared to give myfelf fatisfadiion. Nay, “ my dear creatures, do not get into the dumps; ** you staall rather fcold with impunity than be all fo dully and Silent.
** What a happy deliverance, (added he)— * Ha, my little intended !—you may perceive I “ should not have been trifled with.'—Meeknefs “ is the loveliest ingredient in the female com-“ pofition, as courage in the male ; and as na-turally produces obedience, as the other com-mands reSpedf.—What fay you, Mrs. Sugar-** cake ?”
“ I beg, fir, (Said Mrs. Trueman) you will ** not terrify me !—I would not fpeak on any fubjedi: if I might be indulged. I^—”
Speak So little to the purpofe, (faid he) I fuppoSe you would fay. Why, really, Mrs. Trueman, if nature has deny’d you wit, she has bestowed an ample portion of judgment “ upon you, or you could never have made fo ** judicious a drfcovery.—^But pray, (continued he) tell me what reafon there is for terror? ** do you apprehend any grievance from me ?—
Tell
Miss SOMMER VILE. 255
“ Tell me but that, and I will allow you to shut “ your mouth to the end of otir acquaintance.” Dear Sir, I befeech- ”
“ Don’t provoke me (faid he sternly) with your fenfelefs folly! — What I becaufe I play’d ** you a few unlucky tricks, when a fchool-boy, “ you would ruin me in the opinion of thefe “ ladies I — but rest content, or I will forever ‘‘ banish you my prefence ; which would be to ‘‘ punish you through my fweet coustn’s heart; “ — dr, perhaps, 1 shall Serve you as I did your beloved kitten, crop you for a conjurer. “ Siet me a bottle of your Irish claret on the ta-‘‘ bl'e, and we will drown all animostty. The ** bell must be rung; (added he) must it ?—No, pray, my dear madam, fetch it yourfelf, as you ufed to do out of your store-room, for ‘‘ Jackey, the clerk’s fon.”
What would I have given to be out of the
wretch’s power-------Mr, Shugburgh ; Mr.
Shugburgh 1 thought I, why do you not return!
Mrs. Trueman, arofe with vifible re1ufl:ance ; — but was afraid to incenfe him by an abfolute refufal.
With Solemn step and flow (cried he, mimicking her) “ My dear madam, permit me—” The wretch had the cruelty to give her an ugly whirl, and put her out of the room.
‘‘ Do not be alarmed ladies, (Said he, with odious confidence I) though rather boisterous ‘‘ in my behaviour to this woman, I will be all gentlenefs to you ; nor will I once commit the “ least outrage on this or this fair hand,’’‘ attempting to Seize a hand of each.
For
256 The history ok
For my part, I was quite passive ; he had terrified me into obedience ! — but Patty’s Spirits were rouzed, and ssie clapt her’s behind her.
“ Behold the contrast ! (cried he) my intend-« ed that must lofe me for ever, is all Submiffi-on! whilst the filly fool, whole future days are all at my mercy, is fo impolitic as to be refraSory.—A prayer! — that’s my precious! “ (she did lift up her eyes.) May heaven defend you from So fevere a fate!”
Mrs. Trueman now returned with the claret.
“ This Trueman is a good bustling landlady; (Said he) but (where are the glasses) quite in-“ offenfivc, if wanting a head could make her « fo.
— “ Fetch them, pray I (affeHing to reel) you perverSe hussy I fetch them this instant!”
** Thus, ladies> you fee (refumed he) how I Support my authority ! That dutchefs has pro- -** cured me many a beating, for my barbarity! as mama and her called it.
“ Some water, Mr. Smith ] • (exclaimed 1.) Oh, patty! Patty!” She was finking to the ground at this wanton mention of her mother’s name.
‘‘ I am better, my dear!”
'Which of her dears did my Patty mean ’ ** (Said the unfeeling wretch.)— Here is the of-^ ficious toad again; I must invent Some new “ errand to torment her.” — But to my inex* preshble fatisfafifion, Mr. Shugburgh’s return put-a period to his wicked malice.
I stayed but one quarter of an hour longer, and hurried home, to give you the Scene whilst
the horror of it yet remained upon my mind_
Is there yet a means of happinefs for your’s, &c.
S. Kennington.
L E r-
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 257
t
LETTER LXI.
From the Same to the Same.
Born for persecution, no sstuation can exempt me from my fate.
Lord Kennington began with me this morning. — He did not like Smith and Shugburgh’s great intimacy. —It was true, Shugburgh knew nothing of deceit, in general; but perhaps he might defcend to pra£tife it in Mifs Sarah’s Service.
I would have had recourSe to my ufual refuge, as he calls it, — filence ; but he sternly commanded me to look upon him, and tell him if there was not Something in the wind.
I was So mortified and distressed I could Scarce Support myfelf. — He Seized my shoulder. “ Why does not the witch anfwer me ? (cried he, with an imperious voice) I will shake you “ to atoms before I will Suffer myfelf to be dup-ed by fuch clumfy artifice. Do you, or do you not know where they are ?”
“ I do, my Lord ; (Said I) and I do not, my “ Lord.”
“ Miserable prevaricator! (exclaimed he) how ‘‘ does terror and meannefs banish every grace “ from your afpeQ;! — If you are not imme-“ diately difpofed of, yoiir face will not be worth “ a farthing. But tell me thou paltry trifler, what you do really know ? — for, as to what
** you
258 The history of
you are unacquainted with, is not the objedi of my enquiry.’^
I was almost wicked enough to wisti myfelf dumb. --- You had better not alk me, my Lord,” Said I.
I am upon tenter-hooks; (cried he) what “ have you done, thou distionour to my blood!
“ thou”------
‘‘ I, I, my Lord, am not to. blame ! they are “ both with Patty.”
“ Patty I When ? where ? how ?” demanded he, eagerly.
a Dear fir, do not. look fo angry I — I really “ cannot tell you.”
“ I throw myfelf to distance, (faid he, bounding like an old baboon to the other fide ' of the apartment) lest I stiould forget what is due to your Sex, and abfolutely beat you.
“ But you may as well reveal the whole matter,
“ with a good grace ; for I poSitively will know « it.’^
You know alreadv, fir.”
He stampt with his found foot; (for the gout has rendered one very infirm) then hobbling to the door. — Who waits there ? — I want Lady Sarah instantly. We will fee, mifs, who shall be conqueror.”
Lady Sarah flew to papa’s assistance.
« We are harbouring the bafest of crea-tures ! (faid his Lordship) she has acknowledg-‘‘ ed herfelf in league with our worst enemies; and, now, would meanly unfay alPshe has faid, to fkreen them from mv refentmeat 1”
I shall be fearched, thought 1, and all will be difcoveredss — O, folly I O, imprudence I, when shall I be able to renounce your bondage ! but if
ever
Miss SOMMERVILE. 259
ever I do approach either fire or candle more, I will, most effectually destroy thefe evidences of my intriguing capacity. This apprehenSion operated fo strongly upon me, that I refolved to Sacrifice every other confideration, to deliver my-felf from fuch violence ; I, therefore, acknowledged that I had been informed, they were altogether at the milliner’s in Dartmouth-street.
Never was countenance more defaced by pastl-onThan his Lordstiip’s.—We will deteft them “ in their privacy. Lady Sarah ; (faid he) and their betrayer fhall accompany us. Timid “ fool, — on with your things; we will lofe no time - fear has produced the very effe€fc that a fenfe of duty — But away ! away!” This was a happy refpite: I hastened to my own apartment,, and, in my confufion, not only put every letter I had received from the whole party into the fire, but like wife a long epistle I had wrote to Mr. Fleetwood; and only waited an opportunity of conveying to him.
This bufinefs happily over, I began to refledl: upon what I had done; but a confidence in Mr. Shugburgh’s steadinefs to the caufe he had ef-poufed, and the certainty that undeprived of his favour, Mifs Sommervile could not poffibly be in a worfe Situation, I went down with a very good courage.
A' hackney-coach was at the door, — in my uncle pushed me — and we were foon battered to Mrs. Trueman’s.
T he first objedts that met Lady Sarah’s eyes, as we approached the shop-windoW, was Mr. Bradshaw and Fleetwood, — in waitirg, I fup-pofe, for an interview with our common friend.
Her
26o The HISTORY of
Her features instantly Swelled. — Sure, fir, “ (Said she) this is a common houfe of intrigue !
Mifs Sarah must have improved her natu-ral genius by her frequent vifits to it; — but that was with your approbation.”
Lord Kennington’s judgment called in question, —- Death and destruflion !
“ I only wish, madam, (returned his Lordship “ pettishly) you would attend to the regulation “ of your own affairs, and not invade my pro-vince ; at your time of day a breach of duty ** is utterly inexcufable.”
Time of day! — my poor papa I (muttered “ she, as she got out of the coach) thinks of no-** thing but old age, except where he himfelf is concerned ; — when the blooming Flora and “ all her youthful train are Superannuated in the “ comparison.”
The stopping of a coach at Mrs. Trueman’s was not So extraordinary a circumstance, as to be ufeful.
“ Patty Price, Sweet-heart! (faid his Lord-“ ship to the perfon who attended) our bufinefs is \vith Patty Price.”
The girl had been only a few days in the houfe, and had actually never lieard the name mentioned.
Mifs Sommervile, Mifs Patty Sommervile “ (repeated she) to be Sure, fir, is here; but I “ know of no other lady.”
** Good ! — (cried his Lordship) Lady Sarah, ** did you obferve the name Is changed already.
Shew us to her: Sommervile and Price are ** one and the fame perfon.”
I will call Mrs. Trueman,” Said the girl. Lady Sarah turned round to overlook the gentlemen
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 261
men in her fcornful manner; and I had really the courage to exchange a tender glance with Mr. Fleetwood.
Mrs. Trueman was struck of a heap! ‘‘ We “ are unexpe^ed, Mrs. Trueman ; Said my Lord; but we must fee your young lady; our “ buSinefs is urgent.”
She made no reply; but leading us to the dining-room, threw open the door: “ Lady Sarah, Lord Kennington and Mifs Kennington !” Said she aloud, to Mi 's Sommervile. — In we all rushed.
Patty’s countenance was really pitiable, — Smith’s meanly contemptible ; — but Mr. Shug-burgh knew neither to blush not be confounded, the integrity of his own heart being a never-failing Support; and he addressed Lord Kennington with the fame compofure, as if every step he had taken had had the fan£Iion of his approbation.
“ You fee, my Lord, (laid he) I am a man of “ bussnefs; but, however ungenteel you may “ conceive my treatment of you in the first “ instance, I am confident I shall clear away “ every diffatisfadlion, by difclofing my motives ** that had” —
“ Indeed, Shugburgh, (returned his Lordship) It ill becomes your age and understanding to “ turn knight-errant: — that lady has shone upon more cccafions than one, already; but I “ thought the farce had been over in this coun-try, at least. But she is come out, I find in a new charafiter : —the humble name of Price converted into the nobleTounding Sommervile. But give us her hist.ory, (continued he) as you “ received it from herfelf, and we will judge you
favour-
262	The HISTORY or
“ favourably.” “ I hope, Mr. Smith, she does “ not claim you for a relation ?”
Mr. Smith (Said Mr. Shugburgh) from you. « I received my information :	Is not that La-
dy Sir Edward Sommervile’s daughter ?”
« Why, faith ! my Lord, (replied he) the faff is, as Mr. Shugburgh reprefents it, and “ a most perverfe undutiful child he has found her.”
Lord Kennington’s countenance, from being overfpread with rage and fatire, instantly became placid and fervile.
“ Then, I most Sincerely beg her pardon, (faid his Lordship, with an humble and befeeching voice) for all that is past! and hope she will believe, that had I known her family, I myfelf “ would have been the first to protedl and de-fend her. I have Some obligations to Sir Ed-ward, and should have been glad of an oppor-** tunity of difcharging part of them in her fer-vice. I knew he had a daughter; but little apprehended, as she never appeared in life,, that she was either fo old, or So accomplished “ as this young lady is. Can you, madam, for-give affronts that were not levelled at Mifs “ Sommervile ?”
“ It was happy for me, my Lord, (faid Patty, w’ith her ufual dignity) that indigence and “ and friendlinefs did not concur with your en-endeavours to make me wTetched !”
Had Mifs Sommervile been attacked in her “ own perfon, you would have been a generous << enemy ; and, if fuccefsful, had deferved your triumph : but a young creature fo cruelly cir-‘‘ cumstanced as Patty Price, virtuoussy and in-dustriousty difpofed, to be driven to fuch ex-
tremities
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 263
tremities. Lord Rennington may, perhaps, ‘‘ have Sufficient addrefs to reconcile himSelf to ‘‘ his own condudt; but must never expe6l to be confidered as either a man of honour or humanity by Patty Sommervile. — As my father’s friend, I thank you for your profeffi-‘‘ ons of kindnefs; and if you will take me out of that —- Mr. Smith’s hands until I can be “ restored to his pleafure, you will really ob~ llge me.”
Lady Sarah ! Niece!” (Said the mortified Peer) do you make the offer of my houfe ac-“ ceptable to MiSs Sommervile; I wiU be anfwer-“ able for Sir Edward’s approbation.” — ‘‘A word with you, Mr. Smith !” They withdrew into the next apartment for a few moments, and then rejoined us; but, whatever was their conversation, Smith’s haughty crest was totally Subdued.
“ And as for you, Shugburgh, (Said his Lord-“ ship, taking up his Speech at his return, ex-adtly where he had broke off) are a clever fellow ! and I thus thank you iiliaking him ** heartily by the hand) for every civility you have shewn my friend’s child !”
I.ady Sarah is a true woman of quality, and observed with all the eaSe and confidence imaginable, “ That people could never be an-Swerable for a condu<5t they were drawn into ‘‘ by falSe appearances.”
— Then, Smoothing her features into complacency, and her language into politeneSs, affured Mifs Sommervile, It should be her study to wipe off every diSagreeable remembrance, shy future amity.”
Patty
264 The H I S T O R Y of
Patty and I for the first time, indulged the affedlionate impulSe of our hearts (before fo many fpeclators) by a friendly embrace.
Mrs. Trueman was unable to contain her fur-prize and joy, but wept as plentifully upon this happy occafion, as she had formerly done upon every unhappy one!
Smith made not the least oppoSilion to Patty’s removal, from being fenfible, I fuppofe, that this tyranny would not avail him : the good understanding between my uncle and Sir Edward leaving not the least doubt of his approbation of whatever steps his Lordship propofed; though, you must know, that the earl of Kennington is greatly under the hatches with that gentleman refpefting money-affairs: his estate is, indeed, fo intolerably dipt, as to be rather Sir Edward’s property than his own — nevertheless it was apparent his quality gave him no inconfiderable confequence in Sir Edward’s fight, as Smith was vifibly chagrined, though afraid to acknowledge it.
“ Let us all go together, (faid his Lordlhip) it shall be an evening of jubilee; nor shall one former friend be forgotten. Mrs. Trueman, will you take the trouble of making my com-pliments to the gentlemen below, and through their means to Lord Finly; and beg their company this evening at rny houfe. — Wc “ will be univerfally reconciled.”
Thus has fortune, Dolly, made me ample amends for every unfavourable incident.
I begun the relation as the fa£t began with me, to avoid anticipation on your part; — and if perfecution was always productive of as happy confequences, who would not chearfully fubmit to
its
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 265
its yoke ? — nor do I doubt that every evil is as literally Succeeded by its good as on the prefent occasson; but as moral and human advantages are widely different, the operation is not at ail limes conspicuous.
Patty still trembles with apprehenSion, from a knowledge of Smith’s defperate fpirit; but I look upon him as that fort of cur, that can loudly bark, but runs away when he should bite.
Lord Finly, Bradshaw, and Fleetwood, were in College-green before us; fo impatient were they, I fuppofe, for an explanation of fo extraordinary a change.
Lady Sarah received her favourite very gra-ciousty; Fleetwood had the temerity to kifs my hand in the full face of the company; and Lord Finly had, for once, his Patty’s ear free from all impertinent interruption.
Smith, like the old gentleman in Milton, Sick-ened at the ftgbt of fo much happinefs ! and, af-fefiting hidden diforder, betook himfelf to his apartment.
Our hearts were inexpreffibly animated, and Mr. Shugburgh, for the only time in his life, tho’ a Sailor, drank too freely of the cup of joyy which ever proves intoxicating. — I wish he may not fuffer to morrow-morning for his unbounded fa-tisfa£lion.
But are we not, Dolly, too happy for human
beings : and from what caufe is it derived ?__
Can niy Lord have any meaning in introducing Fleetwood or — But Patty is already asseep; fatigue and unexpeQ:ed felicity have overcome her fenSibility. There she lies on my late miferable bed—that now possesses every essentia! to repofe, VoL. II.	N	^and
266 The HISTORY of
and the thorny pillow is exchanged for the foft-est down.—One more letter from England, one more tender remembrance from my ever-honoured mother, and perfefi: happinefs will, for once, (tho’ perhaps for a moment only) be the portion of frail mortality.	I am, dec.
-S. Kenningtok.
LETTER LXII.
. Mr. Fleetwood to Mifs Kennington.
r
IT is, my: dear Mifs Kennington, as I flattered myfelf, when I received your uncle’s invitation : I am accepted, my propofals approved, and his long with-held and vainly-foUicited confent, is now become a free-will offering.
Smith’s circumstances are, indeed, very deplorable ; Sir Edward is dying, and has neither made nor retains the least capacity of making any proviflon for him ; Mifs Sommervile has a noble foul, nor will leave a favourite of her father’s to defperation, whilst fhe enjoys her ample revenue : but to fuch a difpofition as his, how galling obligation, where he expe(sted to command and tyrannize at large’!
My Lord has even gone fo far as to fix a day for our union:—a distant one ; but with fneh happy profpefts I dare not be discontented. Our meetings may be'frequent, our conversation unrestrained, and we may equally taste the Sweets of life in our preSent as future condition.
Teach
I
Miss SOMMERVILE. .267
Teach me, my beloved girl, to bear this moil iunexpedled good fortune with Some kind of moderation ; So extraordinary a tranfition requires a stronger mind than I am master of, to fup-port it.
Finly’s exultation and happinefs is not inferior to my own!—His Patty is as propitious as his heart can wisti j but has enjoined him to conceal his tranfports and expediation before the gloomy Smith, as long, at least, as they can be concealed.
She ought to know his difpofition best ; but, in my opinion, concessions feed, rather than Subdue, a haughty Spirit.
Poor Bradshaw ! it is Some allay to my felicity to know him unhappy.— His constidfs are great; but, I hope, not above his capacity to Sustain: he distinguishes too justly to be offended either at Mifs Sommervile’s not approving him, or bestov/ing herfelf upon another; but love, however rational at intervals, is not lefs extravagant when the fancy prevails.
She is the only woman that could have overcome his natural infenSibility, and taught him to revere the little formidable deity. I know him well; he has fuch generossty and greatnefs of foul that he will, in a short period, derive more fatisfadtion from the happinefs of her he loves, though unconnedted with his own, than to have beheld her coldly content with him for her hushand. — The Services be has rendered her,—his warm participation in her joys and af-fedlions, beSpeak him what he is, a generous lover, an unexceptionable friend, and a Sort of phi-lofopher.
I confefs he has greatly the advantage of me ; for, however meek and ressgned I may appear, I
N 2	should
268 The HISTORY of
fliould have been outrageous had I lost the ob-jedl of my tenderest affedfion; nor could any motive, for a long, a very long Seafon, have prevailed upon me to behold my rival with even a charitable eye.
Thus are we fitted to our fate Heaven, in companion, to my infirmities, has Spared me, where my strength was unequal, and will, I doubt not, increafe and confirm the worthy resolutions and manly refignation it has bestowed upon Bradshaw.	I am, &c.
R. Fleetwood.
LETTER LXIII.
]\lr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
For a carrier of the feathered race, to
f convey, with due expedition, the happy tidings I have to impart I but it cannot be ;—nor will the lazy post alone, retard your knowledge of our prefent felicity ; but winds and waves must prove propitious ere it can reach you.
What language will best Suit my purpoSe ? — The man of philofophy and refleftion would tell you, that one extreme is ever Succeeded by another; and that, when the tide of afflidfion has run to its lowest ebb, the reflux, purged and purified from every evil,—must Swell and roll in waves of joy I
The poet would obferve, that the beautiful face of nature was no longer obScured by the veil of calamity.
The divine, that Providence had not forgotten to be gracious!—^
The
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 259
The man of trade, — that perfeverance and application had at length prevailed.
The man of the world, that fortune, weary of one continued round, had Suddenly turned her wheel to perSecute the opposste quarter.
And I, in my own proper perfon, Harry, declare that fo great. So happy, and fo unhoped-for a change, has taken place in our affairs; that to believe it the work of chance, would be the worst of infidelity ; and, to confider it as a miracle, I fear the height of prefumption: but, to fay that the hand of Providence has been most wonderfully conspicuous, is Surely Speaking with all due propriety.
You must remember the fituation in v/hich my last letter left the injured Mifs Sommervile. Smith refolved to torment and confine her,—and the worthy Shugburgh as refolute to Sooth and deliver her.
You remember, likewife, our confultations Finly was to receive the loveliest hand on earth,, as a Saving remedy against every threatening evil; — and Bob was to be made happy with Mifs Kennington, from pretty much the Same confi-deration.
And all this was to be accomplifhed clandef-tinely. Mifs Sommervile by Some lucky stroke' releafed, the marriage performed, and a little multitude embarked without either noife or observation ; how pradlicable, I leave to your own wife judgment.
Many methods had been propored,—canvafs’d, —rejedied. Mr. Shugburgh began almost to deS-pair, and difpatched a note, requiring our attendance at the milliner’s, that is, Bob and myfelf for Finly was not to appear lest Smith ssiould fuS-pe£l him to be his rival. — A most neceffary.
•'	N 3	pre*’
t ''
%
2)0 The history of
precaution ; for he has a treacherous afpe£t.
You need not doubt our pun^iuality ; — but poor Shugburgh found it was much eaSier to make an appointment than keep it.—Smith was fo infolent and ungoyernable that he durst not leave him an instant.
Mrs. Trueman, who Is a near relation of the Grievous’s, dealt us out a fhower of tears, and gave her young lady for lost,.— “ He has the most vicious and barbarous difposttion (faid she) that ever was bestowed on man ; and fo. “ entirely poffffes Sir Edward’s ear and heart, that he has the power of giving his owncon-du61: whatever reprefentation he pleafes.”
I had no other means ot relieving my anxiety, than kicking my heels against the counter, and exclaiming against my stars, both of which I did very freely .“Mrs. Trueman had began with great eloquence to perfuade us to renounce every hope, when a coach, by drawing up to the door, obliged her to fly, to hide her blubbered eyes:—and who should it contain but the great Lord Kennington, Lady Sarah, and the fweet Mifs Sarah !
Her Ladyship darted a furious look at me;—■ I met it with compofure ; and, notwithstanding the weight of my misfortunes, turned carelefsly to Bob, and affefted to whifper him.
They called about them with great authority, — Sneered at, and fo intimidated the poor Trueman, that she paraded before them, agreeable to their haughty commands, to Mifs Sommervile’s apartment
Much vociferation was the confequence ; — hut it foon fubstded, and accents of complacency and congratulation were distinguishable.
This was the most incomprehensible part to us
lower
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. ayr
lower mortals; but how was our wonder increa* fed, when Mrs. Trueman, with tears of joy, delivered an invitation to us from Lord Kenning.. ton to fpend the evening at bis houfe?
** It is all over; (cried she) and my dear Mife Sommervile will be immediately conveyed t.o Lord Kennington’s. I heard, whilst I lived “ with her Ladyship, that there was Some no-“ bleman’s family that had borrowed ccnSider-able fums of Sir Edward, and to whole houfe he made frequent excurSions ; but never knew,
“ or, indeed, had the curiofity to enquire his “ name.-—Lord Kenningtoni g^il^^hien, is the ** man ; but it is owing to a letter he yesterday received from England that he is So well-dif-** pofed towards my young lady :•—she had other-“ wife been difpatched to her father, by that vast “ Slant Smith’s hands, and most irreparably un-.
“ done. —I heard only half words between my Lord and shim as they retired from, and re-“ turned to tshe dining-room ; but I do flatter myfelf the old fellow is dead by this time.” Thus she ran on, without stopping a moment, until I intreated her to constder it would be too much for her Spirits; and that we must go to Finly.
That the tranSition might not over-power Ms tender nerves, we afSumed the gloomiest af-pefils'-our circumstances would admit of ; but were fuesh ill dissemblers,—that he instantly challenged us for the news.—Wellj I will not ex-posh him : vve have, it’s true, been rivals; but friendship' is now alone predominant.
Impatient for the. unravelling fo interesting a mystery, we lost no time in repairing to my Lord’s; infomuch, that we arrived before the good company.
N'4	Mr,
%
273 The HISTORY of
Mr. Shugburgh’s felicity overflowed his am--pie heart; he congratulated us, and himfelf a thouSand times ; and, with a fond dotage of a parent, dwelt for ever on the praifes, the per-feflions of his Patty.
Smith’s w^as the only foul to whom joy was a stranger I—hostility and revenge brooded in his afpefit; but we shall deal with him; nor shall his cloven paw interrupt our felicity.
A moment’s conversation with you, Mr. Bradshaw,” Said his Lordship, when the happy parade was, in Some meafure over,—we went into his dreshng-room ; and he opened as follows!:
Perhaps, Mr. Bradshaw, I was a little ab-rupt in my late behaviour to you and your friend; but I apprehended myfelf ill-treated, and therefore am excufable. Our Fleetwood is a very pretty fellow, his brother a most ge-** nerous one; and, stnce he has fet his heart upon my niece, if he can forgive my petulance,, she is his. I own (continued he) — I had o-« ther intentions. — Sir Edward Sommervile’s ** alliance would have been of infinite advan-tage to my family ; but the cafe is altered. Sir << Edward is no more; and Mr. Smith is unhap-** pily deprived of both friend and fortune. Thefe events will happen, Mr. Bradshaw :— Mifs Sommervile will confider him, — and I must not forget my niece. — I know which way her inclinations lean, and MiSs Patty is “ too great a friend to both Fleetwood and her, ** ne t to wish their union. ^ I think I have ex-plained myfelf Sufficiently; (added he) and ** it now rests with you, either to accept or de-** dine what you fo lately follicited.”
I, you may be Sure, made a very handfome Speech for us all; and we rejoined the company.
Patty
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 273
Patty is not yet acquainted with her Sather’s death; a stroke of the palfy deprived him of his Senfes a few days before his departure; therefore, nothing could be done for his darling wretch. He is gone, Harry, and may his Sms be forgiven ! — but certainly .his intentions refpefiing his daughter—-were most heinous!
An heirefs!—the poor, the perfecuted'—Patty a blooming heirefs;—Well, Mifs Sommervile, never was the obje6l: of my affe<5tion ; but shall poffefs the first place in my esteem and friendship. What an extraordinary mind she is miSr-trefs of, undebafed by adverSity! and, I dare believe, unexalted by profperity ! — If Finly had never appeared,— idle, deceitful, prefumptuous expectation, I never should have been her choice. .My principles are too free, my converfation too trifling, and my understanding infufficient to recommend me, with fuch a nice and delicate diS-tinguisher.—May happinefs be her portion ! and every trace of mortification and Sorrow worn, out for ever!
I am entirely cured. — Lord Finly and Mifs Sommervile were formed for each other, and Frank Bradshaw can be content with a batcheT„ lor’s life.
•	t
Adieu, Harry 1 you and I will compare notes over a not-unchearful bottle.— Some years have, indeed, pasted fince the shaft of difappointment was lodged in your heart;—but there it sticks as palpably as ever; for the hand of death struck it too deep for human art to extraCf. :
I am, &c.	Bradsitaws-
• ^
N5.	LE.-T-
I
•J t
At '
274 The HISTORY of'
h"
LETTER LXIV.
Lady Sarah Kennington to MiSs Turner.
YOU will return, Mifs Turner 1 you will return to Dublin, in a fort of evil hour! for the hap.pinefs we promifed ourfelves is not only irretrievably lost, but must be totally forgotten.
My father has most essentially ferved your ssf-ter. Do not think me fo mean' as to reproach you with obligation ; I only wifh to induce you to be equally generous I
Some letters have pasted between us that are not altogether fit for infpedstion !—Convey them to me by a fate hand, and I will releafe both Mrs. Bateman and yourfelf from every engagement.
I shall return to England-very boon. — Some extraordinary things have happened ;—but you know too much of life to be furprized, — and must be too teitder of your own interest to make other people’s affairs the stibjeft of your con- . veriation.
I wish yon a good journey’, and doubt not but I shall have reafon to remain
Your friend, S. Kennington.
4
LETTER LXV..
Mifs Turner to Mrs. Bateman.
V
Do, my dear Sister, but behold the haughty terms in which Lady Sarah addresses me,. after having been her confident, her friend, and
darling
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 275
darling compamon. But it is well; — I shall not comply with fuch imperious commands. —~
If she is ashamed of her letters, I blush for her conduD, and will expofe both the one and the other in all companies where she is known.
I cannot imagine what can have occassdned this Sudden change? — Do enquire.: — I die with curioSity. Can Patty have proved any other than the little mean wretch she ever deScribed her ? or did she paint her in undue colours merely to gratify her own evil difpoSition, and is now dpprehehSive 1 should make it public;
Pray go to Lord Kennington% .and inform her, that I beg a key to her letter; for that it is utterly unintelligible.
Itshall not be in Dublin So Soon as Pexpelled.
=— This aunt of mine is a most unreasonable monster to drag me from town under a promife of staying only a few weeks,— and has taken up her relldence for months.
I will assure Lady SarahH am not < to , be treated So ungenteelly: — if her father has obliged you, you obliged him ; and there the matter ought to have rested. Did you not entertain his little dirty idol, give him every opportunity of winning her to his purpoSe.; . and, if she was refraflory, was you to. she blamed? I can tell you, your letter cost me Some tears ; I. would have perished before I would have iubmitted to do fuch deSpicable work.—Had -he attempted an affair of gallantry >yith yourSelf, indeed, I should not have sheen Surprized; but, . at your age, and with your accomplishments, to be made a procureSs, is odious !
However, as I Said before, do not Sail to-inform Lady Sarah, that I am not the eaSy fool she takes -me.for; and that ten cold lines are insufficient to
prevail-^
276 The HISTORY of
prevail upon me to forego the pofleflion of fuch valuable papers.
■ Manage the affair with what addrefs you pleaSe ; but my meaning is literally neither more jior lefs, than that I will teach her repentance, for conceiving that a paultry title is a fandlion for fuch over-bearing behaviour to a perfcn as well born as herfelf, and your affeftionate Sifter,
' S. Turner.
LETTER LXVI.
/<
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
PASSING over Effex-bridge, my boy, yesterday-noon, who should accost me with the Simper of civility, but the window Bateman, who had So lately declined all connedfion with me. It is not my difpofition to shock a fair lady ; I therefore affeQ;ed an equal degree of cordiality, and attended her home.
You are a good creature (Said she) and will not deny me one fraall request. — Dine with^e.”
‘‘ You -must excufe me, I am engaged in the
Green.’^
Female rhetoric is very powerful, and she renewed hers with fuch fucceSs, that, on condition I might take my leave as early as I pleafed, I confented to obey her.
I was not at a lofs to guefs her motive. — Cu-riostty is a reigning principle.
‘‘ Any news, Sir ?” demanded she Significant-“ ly.) The papers were never emptier,” re-turned I, politically.
« But
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 2)^
But in the beau monde refumed she.
Faith, madam, (anfwered I coolly) you know better than I; for I have few engage-“ ments.”
“ You want to impofe (faid she, fimperlng) “ upon me; Lord Kennington Sees much com-pany, and-------”
“ Come, come, madam, (interrupting her) ‘‘ do not judge of others by yourfelf. You “ know there has been a breach amongst us ; ^ —nay, countenanced, abetted, by Mrs. Bate-“ man. — Was not that Sweet brow totally “ contrasted, and at the concert a fortnight ‘‘ ago, when I would have Saluted you with my hat, how meaningly was that pretty head in-stantly averted ? I know Lord Kennington was ‘‘ the cauSe of that effeSl, as well as the define ‘‘ of enquiring after his family is the motive of “ your preSent behaviour.—ConfeSs,—and I am “ yielding as air: — perfist in your endeavours ‘‘ to deceive me, and not one Syllable shall paSs “ theSe lips.”
“ What an oddity! (cried she) but I ought not to be Surprized, that have been an eye-“ witneSs of So many of your whimfical Sallies: and what shall I gain by acknowledging you are a conjurer, and have deteSted my pur-pofe?”
“ Only a whole packet of information, my dear madam, — As how, that there is an en-“ tire revolution in that family: -—Bob and “ Mifs Kennington are to be married within ihis fortnight — the friendleSs Patty Price proves to be a woman of very great fortune; — and that Lord Kennington’s face is Set against every one that was even fuSpeSted to be her enemy.”
She was utterly confounded.	May
278 The HISTORY or
“ May I depend on what you now tell me “ •— (demanded she with a tremulous voice.)—.
“ It would be cruel to trifle witlv me on fo im-portant an occaSion.”
“ That is, Mrs. Bateman, that if T have in “ any degree exaggerated matters, you would incur the ridicule of your polite friends for giving them a falfe relation.”
Upon my honour, Sir, you miftake me ; I “ am very unhappy! — (Her eyes began to “ twinkle out a few tears.)— Lord Kennington.; “ has not ufed me well; and perhaps, may give •“ an ill-turn to the very offices he put me.on performing.”
“ We ought to be very cautious, Mrs. man, (Said I, she deferved a Severe rap on thfe “ knuckles, Harry, for being, sh buSy) how we ** Suffer ourfelves to be drawn into impropriety;, “ for notwithstanding appearances, — there are -“ fo many turns in life, that we are frequently “ only a£ting against ourfelves when w’^e think we ** are deferving another : beSides it is both mean “‘and unjustifiable to become aTool to any one.” She fobbed most audibly-: — the tender heart*-ed fex are eafily worked upon;
“ I would no more have taken any adverSfe -“ step against the young Lady (cried she) than , “ I would have flown, if Lord Kennington had . ** not incited me to it;—yet-1 fuppofe I shall be-, “ Sacrificed on his part for a peace-offering.”
“ It is very vexatious, madam, (refumed l) to ' “ have any dealings with the great—the earthen pot will ever-be dashed in pieces.—Can I Serve “ you ?” I was really Sorry for her.A weeping fair one is irrefistible I
“ I think fo, fir; — but i must first write to my fister.”
There is much-to be Said, Harry, in this wo-
.V, «	'
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 279
man’s Savour. She is naturally of a complying temper ; Lord Kennington perceived it, and, her mistortunes concurring, took a mean advantage of it. She most reludlantly entered into the bafeft part, at least, of his deSigns, as the fellow alSured me, from whom I received an account of Patty’s sttuation ; but how could she avoid as she
was then circumstanced ?-----
She did not chufe to be more communicative at this period ; and the dinner very opportunely, gave a turn to the conversation.
1 did not obferve who waited until, upon a demand of wine, I was Surprized to fee a shaking glafs prefented to me; — when, looking, at the fellow’s face,. I, at once, increafed his confuston, and informed myfelf of the caufe.—
—It was my friend, — who So repeatedly drank ray health at the tavern.,
Mrs. Bateman, notwithstanding her own diS-trefs, was too quick-stghted not to perceive fome-thing was the matter; and as the gudcy are ever Sufpicious, had, I' fuppole, a confufed apprehen-fion of his treachery : — she was, however. So prudent as to conceal it until he was withdrawn.
I am Surrounded by deceit; (Said she) nor have you, str, been free from Some ungenteel pradhices ;—to tamper, with a Servant was “ descending very low, indeed.”
“ Look ye, Mrs. Bateman, I fccrn to palliate; your Sudden coldnefs towards perfons that had never offended you, and warm attachment lo Kennington was fufficient to alarm a lefs fuf-ceptible mind than mine. I own it was not the noblest addon of ray life even to oppofe fraud by fraud; — but if Mrs. Bateman could have avoided purfuing fome cruel meafures against an innocent andunoffending perfon,—
Mr.
28o The HISTORY of
“ Mr. Bradshaw had never attempted to pry Into “ the Secrets of her family.”
“ What delight you take in mortifying me! *< — (faid she.) This, however, is not the point in question ; you was profesting an incll-** nation to Serve me.”
Nor is that inclination (returned I) extln-** guished ; but you determined to write to your ** stster previous to every other step.”
“ True, Sir; but will you not fail to give me ** your company Some future day ?”
Thus it must ever happen with perfons who; negle<5Iful of their interest, fall into misfortunes,. ^
__Seek to repair thoSe misfortstne^ by crimes ; —
and to justify thoSe crimes, by accuSing their employer. — What deSpicable characters there are in life I
As to our own affairs, they are in-a very orderly way. — Next Thurfday is appointed for Bob’s wedding-day, for Mr Shugburgh is of opinion, that it is best to strike whilst the iron is hot; nor, by throwing in the mortifying account of Mrs. Kennington’s death, retard an event that has been So long intended to take place; and, if delayed, would yet be within the reach of Some evil accident. lam, &c.	Bradshaw.
LETTER LXVH.
MiSs Kenning TON to MiSs Carey.
I Cannot be perfedly contented, my dear Dolly, unleSs I mySelf receive a letter from my mother. Mr. Shugburgh tells me he will give me a Satisfactory account of her. I have great
faith
Miss SOMMER VILE. aSt
faith in all he fays; but I own I cannot SuppreSs all apprehenfion. Yet, perhaps, she may have complimented him So much upon the friendly part he has a6led towards me, — that out of modesty he will not let me fee her epistle. I must perfuade myfelf, that is the cafe, or I should blast the happinefs of a most worthy heart I
Mifs Sommervile was a good deal shocked at the news of her father’s death, notwithstanding all his cruelty. She has had a letter from her friend Mifs Stainshy, informing her of the whole affair.
It Seems Sir Edward was very low-fpirited for Several days before his paralytic complaint Seized him. Sent for Mr. Stainshy, and had much conversation with him.
He mentioned his Lady rather tenderly, and Said, “ He believed she had been injured in his « good opinion.”
Mr. Stainshy, who had a great reSpedt for Lady Sommervile’s memory, told him, ‘‘ He was Sorry he could ever have Suffered himSelf to be ‘‘ So groSsly impoSed upon, as even to entertain a shadow of Suspicion of Such a wonaan.”
‘‘ You fee, (laid Sir Edward,) how unnatural “ and rebellious the girl has adted, to withdraw herfelf from my knowledge ; nor had she ever ** that affedfion for me, that is ufual in So near a “ relation.”
“ You will excuSe me, fir, (returned Mr. ** Stainshy) Since you yourfelf have introduced “ the Subjedf, if I take the liberty of observing, ‘‘ that there was Something equally wrong irr your behaviour. — You made a kind of pri-foner of your child, obliged her to hide her-Self when you had any company at your houSe ; and, but for her intimacy with my daughter,
her
282 The HISTORY of
“ her time must have hung very heavy upon her: “ hands.”
“ I had my reaSons, Sir; (Said Sir Edward^ hastily) girls of fortune are every ones game ; — and I was not difpofed to bestow my estate^ but upon a fcoundrel of my own chufing.” Then you had made choice of a hufband for the young lady
“ You know it, Mr. Stainfby, — and have “ opened your mouth pretty largely against my intentions ; — but you may be assured that if I had not had very fubstantial proofs of her ** illegitimacy, (tho’ infufficient to, destroy her “ claim to my estate) 1 stiould not have thought' of fuch a thing ; — but if it was to be enjoyed by a Spurious heir, — why not one that I had “ Some interest in ? — Ned, I am Sure, is my “ own; and if his mother had lived, I Should have efcaped my prefent difgrace and afflici?-tion 1”
** O, Sir, (Said Mr. Stainfby) this is alament-** able tale ! — No condudi on earth was freer from reproach than Lady Sommervile’s:—She ‘‘ never abfented herfelf from her family ;—ne--ver vissted but when you was with her; nor had one connediion that could refleft the mi»-“ nulest dishonour on her.”
Take care, Mr. Stainshy, your zeal does not render you a fufpedted perfon; not as “ principal, but an agent in the buSinefs.—Your late curate, Slingshy, was an inSinuating raS> “ cal, and Lady Sommervile evidently fond oS ** his company and conversation.”
“ It is most cruel, Sir, (Said Mr. Stainshy)^ to accufe the dead : this is a piece of Scandal “ that was never even broached during the life
“of
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 283
of either party; nor, I dare believe, never would, but for the bafest of purpofes.”
“ Sir, (cried Sir Edward warmly) you are an “ impertinent fellow!—How dare you take fueh liberties with my family “ If, (Said Mr. Stainlby) to defend the inno-cently-afperfed is to be impertinent, it is an impertinence that Suits my profession and cha-ra(^er. I have frequently wllhed to talk with you ; upon this fubjedt; but would not have ‘‘ led to it myfelf;—for,'believe me, fir, you are made very free with by your neighbours, “ whether with or without, your knowledge I cannot determine ;—and Mifs Sommervile’s “ flight imputed to a horrid caufeS^
** It is very necessary, to be fure, (Said Sir Ed-“ ward) that a man of ray fortune, should in-“ vite every cobler in his parish, to fit in judg-ment upon his actions; — that I have condeS-“ cended to account for them to you, has been rather the effedt of accident than premedita-tion ; for I cannot fee how you can have any thing to do with it.”
“ ExcuSe me. Sir Edward ; but a man of my fun6tion must not permit offences against law “ and nature to be committed within his know-ledge unnoticed ; nor fliould I have continued much longer stlent, if the young lady had not removed herfelf.”
Sir Edward was incenSed :	She must have
Some ‘ ashstant; (exclaimed he), and I shall “ henceforth conssder you as a bufy troublefome “ fellow ;—and beg I may fee no more of you.” Mr. Stainshy arofe, and having genteelly remonstrated, that it was the duty, of a clergyman, to reprove Sin wherefoever he found it—he took his leave; telling Sir Edward, ‘‘ that he should
be
i>84 The HISTORY of
be always ready to attend him when required ; “ but would not again be officioussy intruSive.’* He had not been many hours at home before he received a Second meffage from Sir Edward.
“ You have disturbed me greatly, (Said he) ‘‘ by the opinion I find you entertain of my prin-ciples.—What a monster to unite my own children !—I tell you, I’ll hear no more of it.” It is So poor a piece of Sophistry, fir, (re-turned Mr. Stainfby) that you are now prea-ching, that it will neither Secure your confci-ence nor reputation from being called in que-stion. If Lady Somraervile had not both lived ** and died in the parlfh, indeed, fuch a story “ might have obtained credit. You yourfelf ‘‘ have not even the voice of fame to miflead you ;—tho’, in that cafe, it is running ashock-** ing riik, to rely upon common report, where, the strongest evidence would be almost infuf-“ ficient,”
Thus the time was past ;—now Seeking to justify his intentions; and now condemning the Severity of thofe very cenfures he invited.
Mr. Stainfby had left him only a few moments the third morning, and was beginning to hope that he stiould not be unfuccefsful in his labours to correfil his patron’s heart, when he was hastily recalled, and found him in a dreadful state; helplefs as infancy, and with intelleffs equally limited.
He knew not where to find Smith, and was unwilling to expofe the step Mifs Sommervile had taken, by a public enquiry after her; for Mifs Stainfby happened to be abfent upon a vifit at that jundiure, and she had never intimated the least knowledge of Mifs Sommervile’s affairs to her father; as she was apprehenfive his stridt
principles
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 285
principles would ruin all she had accomplished.
In this dilemma he determined to write to Lord Kennington, as the most interested perfon ; —but whilst he debated,—Sir Edward expired : therefore, that very letter that began with an account of his illnefs, concluded with his death; So foon w'as the one Succeeded by the other.
Mifs Sommer vile has had the generofity, in considering of Smith’s education, hopes, and her father’s affeffion for him, to continue an estate of five hundred a year in his poffeshon, which Sir Edward had for Some time allowed him by way of pocket-money. He had been rambling in quest of Patty, when fome of his idle companions engaged him in a frolic to Dublin; a circumstance that never reached Sir Edward’s knowledge ; for all the letters he produced of his approbation of his match with Mifs Kennington, terms of fettlement, &c. were of his own writing; for he knew well to counterfeit that ‘ gentleman’s hand.
He has entered into a bond for his good behaviour ; the penalty of which is no lefs than the forfeiture of his five hundred a year, if he interferes with, or molests Mifs Sommervile. How well he may perform his engagement is impostl-ble to judge.
I would delay my approaching change of condition, until decency would permit Patty to change her’s alfo; but am over-ruled by the higher powers. Mr. Shugburgh, in particular, most strenuousty oppofes me, and you know what implicit obedience I have vowed to him. We shall not return to England until the breaking up of the parliament, when Lord and Lady Finly w'ill accompany us.
♦
286 The HISTORY of
I, at prefent, enjoy the highest fatisfafiUon of love and friendship.—Patty’s heart is most amiably formed for the one, and the gentle Fleet-wood’s for the other ;—and I am almost afraid, from the impoffibllity of augmenting them, that they must necessarily declino. Every thing is in a state of fluQ;uation ; the eminence is no fooner attained than we begin to defcend :—but I neither possefs nor wish for the gift of prophecy; I will, therefore, rejoice in that felicity that is dealt out to me, and leave futurity to the direction of that Providence that has always wrought wonderfully for me. Adieu:—this is the last letter, unlefs Some evil accident intervenes, you will ever receive from S. Kennington.
C0004^0000	0000 ocoo 0000	0000	0000	0000	0000 oodo 4^
LETTER XXXI.
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
TO-morrow, Harry, is the day that is to give you a new relation, and dignify Bobby with the title of Hushand.
Great preparations are making at my Lord’s; he will have it fplendid, which I think is rather unbefitting the humility of the bride and bridegroom’s inclination.
We are to have a ball in high taste; not one of your little made-up affairs I ufed to defcribe to you:—yet will the partners be nearly the Same.—Mr. Bradshaw, Lady Sarah,—Mr. Shug-burgh ;—hut he will not dance, it Seems, upon the occaSion, except a minuet with the bride. Lord Finly, Mifs Somm ervile,-—Bobby Fleet-wood, and, contrary to all rule, I believe, (but
he
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 287
s	0
he pouted horribly when it was otherwise pro-poSed) and thb lovely Mrs. Fleetwood are again to join hands.—I shall not steep lest Some disaster should interrupt our promiSed felicity.
MiSs Sommervile’s vivacity is greatly improved ; but her other profeftions, from being incapable of addition, remain exadlly as on our first acquaintance.
She rallied me rather unmercifully ; but with fuch fweetneSs and pleafantry upon the Services I intended her, that I could not be dissatisfied ; yet I felt very Small, and, I doubt not appeared fo. She is, however, convinced of my integrity, and that whatever advantages I might have taken of her fuppofed fallen state, I abhorred fedufiUon, and loved her more on believing her innocent, than if I had known her for an empreSs. She really is fuch a woman in perSon, understanding, behaviour, and temper, as I never before met with, and I shall have great pleafure in introducing her to your acquaintance.
Finly is a worthy fellow, and well deServes her. His difpcfition and Sentiments are fo in-tirely correspondent with hers, that if ever a married life Avas a blessed one, theirs cannot fail of being fo 1
Just returned from church.—This morn has been propitious! and may every Succeeding one bring increafe of happineSs!
Bob afTumes a very consequential air ; but no wonder : this acquisition is a most defirable one, as you yourfelf v.^ill gladly .acknowledge before many months have elapfed.
I congratulate you on this lovely addition to your family, aud take Some little merit to my-Self for having promoted it.
?v'Iy
288 The HISTORY of
My Lord and Mr. Shugburgh had a kind of friendly contest, reSpedting the propriety of their pretenstons to difpostng of the lady.—My Lord inSisted upon it, that the office of father more essentially appertained to him, from having Supplied that charaQ:er to his niece on her deprivation of her a6lual parent. Mr. Shugburgh urged that friendship’s claim was fuperior to every other.—A claim that was justified by the whole company.
But here is Bob with an inquiSitive eye, endeavouring to run over what I have wrote.— Your pardon, fir, the step you have this morning taken utterly difqualifies you for a batchelor’s confidant.—We will fold up the paper, if you pleafe, and have a little conversation.—The proi-
pofal does not Suit you :-your moments are
loo precious :--get you gone, then for a Self-
Sufficient puppy ! the day will come when I shall be restored to my share of consideration but a new-married man, and a difconfolate lover, are the most infufferable of mortals. I have lived to fee a happy termination of this amour, and hope this poor Mifs Sommervile’s will end as fatisfa6i;orily ; but I own I myfelf begin to fear for her.
Smith promifed to takehimfelf off immediately, on Patty’s generofity; but I am informed he still lurks about incog.—It has an ugly appearance, and we must be much upon our guard.
I think it is paying a most ridiculous complU ment to the dead, to neglect the Securing the felicity of the living on their account, as I shall endeavour to convince the honest Shugburgh whom, I am amazed, did not violently oppofe the unexpefled delay ; but his heart is abforbe^ by joy, and he has no attention for futurity.
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 289
I wonder I have not yet been purSued with^ a hue-and-cry ; for I shall retain So much confe-quence with my company as to be Spared as little as poffible. lam, &c.	Bradshaw.
LETTER LXIX.
Mrs. Fleetwood to MiSs Carey,
There is no end my dear Dolly to the congratulations and entertainments I am Surrounded with—From being the veriest inssgrii-ficant in nature, I am become of the greatest confequence. No party is complete without Mrs. Fleetwood ; no judgment on any occasson passed, but she is confulted. That ever Such happinefs should be reServed for fo trifling an individual!
But do not mistake me; it is not the distinction paid me, it is not the flattering my vanity or ambition, that constitute* any part of my felicity-—No, my friend, vanity and ambition have very little to do with the delights of friendship and the union of hearts.
Mr. Bradshaw has been at work with our common friend-he thinks it highly necessary that Lord Fihly should assume the right of protecting Mifs Sommer vile, in order to prevent her being injured or infiilted ;—and he does apprehend Some great enormity is hatching against her.
Smith has been Seen Several times with a plot-ing infolent afpeCt. This is a country where many daring dessgns have been carried into execution ; but I will still hope the best. I am certain she has too much reSoluticn to be inti-Vol. II.	O	midated
f
i29® The history of
raidated into any sthemes. He may plan 5 and, for the rest, vigilance must be our card.
Mr. Shugburgh has made me a handfome present, and afSures me that I shall find mySelf particularly mentioned in his will.—Long, very long may that period be distant! for it is not in the power of friendship to bestow a choicer blef-fing upon me. I beg you will not, in the overflowings of your partiality, make too favourable ' mention of me to your Fleetwood; for, upon my word, I shall not anfwer his expeQations.
Fatigue and vexation have been of no advantage to my compleftion ; and you well know that is the most tolerable poffeffion I can boast.
You will, likewife, pleafe not to Suffer your affedfions to be engaged by him, or any other perfon; for Patty and I have already difpofed of you.
I would have wrote you a very different letter, as to length, if I might have been permitted to follow my inclinations;—but you have too much good fenfe to conceive my friendship is in any degree diminished, from my being carried a little out of my ufual courfe by the prefent rapidity of the stream ; and be assured, the moment I have leifure to recoiled myfelf, I will make you ample amends.
Befides, child, you must make Some allowances for my impatience, for Subscribing a name that has ever been So dear to me-.— It Seems as if, by placing the beloved charadters before your eyes, I should confirm my claim to them; but, be it as it may, depend upon it that Sarah Ken-nington was neither a more dutiful daughter or more affe^ionate friend than will be found in
S. Fleetwood.
LET-
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 29.1 LETTER LXX.
Mifs SoMMERViLE to MiSs Carey,
Dear Madam,
I Take this opportunity to introduce mySelf to your acquaintance and future correfpondence. Mifs Kennington has long amufed you with my adventures:—many and various have been the turns I have experienced.
Mr. Shugburgh never performed any office with fo good a grace as bestowing your lovely friend upon the worthy Fleetwood; nor did Fleetwood ever make a better figure than in the instant of receiving her. His countenance is Sweetly turned, manly, majestic; but generally overfpread with ferioufnefs, if not abfolute de-jedliom
The change was delightful: his eye, his cheek denoted the fatisfadfion of his foul, and abundantly convinced us, that fuch strong fenfi-bility knew to fet a proper estimation on felicity.
I beg, Mifs Dolly, you will be pleafed to con-Sider me as an old acquaintance;—your taste, your Sentiments, nay, your very perfon is familiar to my imagination :—then, do not throw me to a distance, by idle ceremomes.—My heart is perfedtly yours; therefore, treat it accordingly.
I am the worst in the world for deferibing pretty feenes by my pen ; but in the way of conversation no one can exceed me.—If then you will be content for the prefent, with being barely told,—that we went to church,'—performed ithe bufinefs,—and returned well Satisfied,—you
O 2	mav
292 The HISTORY of
may depend upon hearing every particular when we meet;—and in Such happy language, that you shall imagine you behold the whole tranfa€ti-on.—You .are a, good tra6table girl,—and shall find your account in it.
By the way, MiSs Dolly, I have a quaere for your most private ear: Bradshaw, is a lively, entertaining, and valuable fellow-.—^Which in your opinion is most eligible,—to lead a Solitary unfa-tisfadlory life;—or reward all the fervices he has rendered your friends with your-fair hand ?
Ta:ke the matter into conssderation, and let me know your undifguifed fentiments.—I never yet attempted to promote the matrimonial trade; but I think it is a piece of justice you have both an undeniable claim to.
Mrs. Bride is peeping over my shoulder, and abets my propofal:—he has many excellent qualities,—a little too volatile, I grant you; but we engage to reform him agreeable to your taste.
Write to us Soon, accept our joint wishes for your happinefs, and believe me to be most (in-cerely yours,	M. Sommervile.
P. S. Mr. Shugburgh undertakes to fay proper things for us to Mrs. Kenninglon ;—therefore, not a word of this letter.—She is So far past the romantic age, that she must have forgot what inexprestibie pleafure there is in folly.— Wisdom is a most valuable attainment;—but folly, innocent delightful folly, best Suits a youthful heart: adieu.—You will understand the meaning of this postscript.—Your friend has left me ; but I have not time to explain mySelf.—Poor Mrs. Kennington was not to See this happy day!
L E 1'-
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 293
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
LETTER LXXI.
The whole great day, my good Harry, paS-Sed away agreeably; elegance and propriety governed the feast; and pleafure enlightened every countenance.
Lady Sarah, indeed, felt Several stneaSy pangs. —Envy is an infernal paffion—confequently must ■ torment the breast it inhabits.
It is pity that I am incapable of entering into* the particulars of this evening in my peculiar manner, as you would really find it very entertaining. Finly and I changed partners Several ti.mes ; — thoSe periods were delightful; — but bufineSs of lefs /oftnefs must employ my pen.— That Smith! but I hope I have.most effe'ftually defeated his purpofes.
I have carried my point, and awakened Shug-burgh from his lethargy of felicity; and he is, . beyond meafure, convinced of the folly of postponing Finly’s nuptials : therefore all hands will be fet to work to promote, its immediate com- -pletion.
I have Seen Mrs. Bateman, and, agreeable to my promife, accommodated matters between her and Lord Kennington's family: if that can be called an accommodation, that destroys the con** nefitions of parties for ever.
She intrusted me with the conveyance of a whole packet of letters, most carefully Sealed, to Lady Sarah, and acknowledged they had paffed between her fister and that Lady, refpefiling Mifs
O 3	Somme^
294 The H I S T O R Y op
Som.mervile; — that they were most haughtily demanded by Lady Sarah, and as reluftantly delivered up by MiSs Turner; neverthelefs, stie engaged in her fister’s name, as well as in her own, to pafs an a6l of oblivion on all that had happened, beginning at the Holyhead adventure, and terminating with the difcovery of Patty’s confeqiience :—So, adieu, Harry, to all mention of the widow Bateman and Mifs Turner, from this time forth.
Lady Sarah is really a very decent-behaved perfon, when not immediately under the dominion of pride and malice ;—and perfedl harmony reigns amongst us.
Lord Kennington’s houfe is crowded;-----for,,
as he has altered his mind, ivith refpe6I to his continuance in this country, and propofes returning to England in a short time after^ Finly’s marriage, we have all had the modesty to take up our refidence under his roof. *
Lady Sarah, from a nice pundtilio, removed the bufy Mrs. Brett from her station, on the first difcovery of Mifs Sommervile’s real charafter; but has provided her another place, to the fatif-fadlion of all parties.
For, notwithstanding, she had rather rendered herfelf an objeffc of difgust, if we could pardon her lady’s mistake, we might certainly overlook the error she was drawn into: to pleafe the great; and, at the fame time, obtain a handfome reward, is no inconfiderable temptation:—befides, Harry, had we not all Something to be forgiven for.
All preparation for Finly’s wedding is to be conduced as privately as possible; but the publication of it is to reach every corner of the three kingdoms.
Sir
* ' f
Miss S O M M F R V I L E.
Sir Ed'^ard has been dead onst one month; therefore, revelling wc‘'d be no ^Ss inconSStent than impolitic. We, indeed, St.ained a point on Mrs. Fleetwood’s acco’ nt, conlidering every cir- . cumstance; bnt *ny Lord is very politive and ablu'd in all his ic’-cluticns.
Monday next is fixed for the happiest day of Finly’s life.—W hy was I not born for the Same felicity ; yet rendered to lufceptible of its inesti- ‘ mable value !—But, away, restedtion —the giddy lad es inSist upon my assuming the Soft bondage, fo much approved by themfelves, and have
air* ady marked me down a fair partner. I can believe Ujc is very ocwrvnig,	r'
bclds in Mrs. Fleetwood’s affections aud yoiir approbation !—but, alas! I am not now the man 1 have been!—the charm of my vivacity is ma great meafure broken!—my philofophy destroyed, and my felf-complacence lost for ever.
I make no protestations, though — time may work wonders! and the heart that was unfuc-cefsful in its first attachment, may. So far at leaff recover itfelf, as to enter into a very tolerable friendship with an agreeable female; —but no violence must be expeCted.
I am convince^ shat. upJ^'^^'jj jjvO greatest
consternation' • and away they all flew,. heaven only knows where, upon a melancholy, and, I am apprehenSive, fruitlefs purfuit.
My heart is torn to pieces.—Mifs Sommervile, .. Ib dear to me! —Lord Finly fo dear to my huS* band, is it possible we can ever taste felicity again!
Smith’s wretches have certainly Iain in wait for us, wherever-we have gone and perceiving how indifferently we were this morning guarded availed themfelves of our unfortunate negleft.
I never expeCt to fee her more; he will undoubtedly remove her far from their reach or dist
O <	rovpr...
296 The HISTORY op
most efficacious antidote you can be possessed of > but So many years have paff^d ssnee the grave Swallowed up your beloved, —and you have So long accustomed youiSelf to make familiar mention of your misfortunes, that it is not impossible but fhe might steal upon your heart. Never frown at the Suggestion : >— I will maintain the possibility; or,, tell me whence this levity, where the stroke has been So recent ? Our constitufi-ons !<— a fiddle- stick !—-But it is not my interest to convince you, and I will forbear.
Next Morday —O Finly —Harry, applaud and pity the feelings of poor Bradshaw.
letter lxxii.
Mrs. Fleetwood to MiSs Carey..
TH E So much dreaded evil has overtaken us!—Overtaken us, my Dolly, at a period when we least expeded it. What has morta-lity to boast,—^when, but this hour we attain the Summit of happineSs—and the next are preci-pitated into the gloomy valley of afflidion I
C,;;twithstanding; sheliad
-herfelf an objea of difgust, if we could pardon .her lady’s mistake, we might certainly overlook the error she was drawn into: to pleafe the great; and, at the fame time, obtain a handfome reward, is no inconSiderable temptation :—beSides, Harry, had we not all Something to be forgiven
for.	.	,
All preparation for Finly’s wedding is to be
conduaed as privately as possible; but the pu^
lication of it is to reach every corner of the
three kingdoms.
Miss SOMMER VILE. 297
frienchhip; but little imagined it was the last time he should behold us with fatisfaffion.
We had only got one street from the church? before we were alarmed by a concourfe of rabble ; it was only a battle, the people informed us, and we might pafs Safely on. —How chance and defign united to effe£t our destruQiidnf
We had proceeded but a.few paces when Something was thrown at the horfes heads ;—> they began to plunge dreadfully, and I cried out for assistance. Mifs Sommervile appeared uncommonly compofed and endeavoured to per-fuade me there was no danger; but she had Scarcely finished the Sentence before we received, the terrible shock of being thrown over.
I am amazed the miSchief ended there:—many perfons were officious to assist us :—two chairs instantly prefented themfelves; and as we were neither of us hurt, and impatient to get home, we most inconsiderately embraced the means accident Seemed to furnish us. with, of being con-, veyed thither.
1, indeed, arrived Safe; but Mifs Sommervile-has. not fince been heard of. I Sent immediately for the gentlemen, threw them into the greatest grief and consternation •, and away they all flew, : heaven only knows where, upon a melancholy, , and, I am apprehenfive, fruitlefs pprSuit.
My heart is torn to pieces.—Mifs Sommervile,.. fo dear to me! —Lord Finly So dear to my huS-band, is it possible we can ever taste felicity again! ■
Smith’s wretches have certainly lain in wait for us, wherever we have gone and perceiving how indifferently we were this morning guarded, availed themfelves of our unfortunate negleff.
I never expeft to fee her more; he will undoubtedly remove her far from their reach or dif-
O 5	covery.
298 The HISTORY of
covery, and—but here is Lady Sarah;—I cannot bear the Sight of her ; not that I SuSpedl her upon this occaSion ; but she has given many proofs of most astonishing ill-nature.
; *****'
,	Twelve o’clock.
Not a Soul returned ; nor, I fear, the least in^
telligence obtained. —What a night is this ! —-
and Lady Sarah, how unfit for the tender office
of confolation I As for my Lord, he has shut
himfelf up ever Since the accident. I shall walk
my apartment,— tell the tedious hours, — and
listen to every found with anxious hope!—That
ever I was born ! it was by my means that Smith
difcovered — but I shall pay the price.—-Good
night! good night! I grieve, for your part, in
the general astlidion.
*•*■** * *
Monday-morn.
Oh, Dolly! I die with apprehenfion I—They are returned without her but Some fatal catastrophe, I am confident, has been the confer quence. My Fleetwood Sighs as if---Tell me not of comfort 1 —-I never shall know it more !
'—Thofe looks,—-that deep astlidlion informs me I am undone!
Does Patty live ? have you feen or heard << any thing of her ?”—He cannot anfwer; and my poor heart'--Adieu.
L E T t 'E R LXXIII.
%
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
HARRY! my ever valuable Elarry! do not feek to know the calamity I can ne-
N 5	ver
,Mrss SOMME R V I L E. . 299
ver communicate. Yeti will tell you —Oh! they have murdered the fairest!—Hush! Finly raves;—but he is delivered from the anguish I experience. — The brain once destroyed, can thought—I hear him again: on my bofom he shall recline.—Yes, Finly, once your rival, now-your everlasting friend and companion of your Sufferings!—I must away; the fad story will reach you, alas 1 too Soon.—Let the public tell it;—the public alone can be equal to the relation.
Will not Heaven relieve this bursting heart 1 .— There he lies a horrid Speftacle, quite exhausted!— and . to what purpofe his return of strength,—but to be expended in the fame dreadful manner. The human frame is not So weak as generally reputed, — or Such conflifts could never have been repeated.
I will get Shugburgh to write: — he, though not the least 'affli61ed, is the most collefted of us all. — Scenes of horror are not new to him; — and though he ever feels,—^^he feels with due resignation.	Bradshaw.
LET T E R LXXIV,
Mr. Shugburgh to Mr. Fleetwood.
Sir,
I Am.but little equal to my prefent nnde'ddel;
ing; but Mr. Bradshaw’s strong follici^®*’ have fubdued me, and I will en'i'C-^may plain the dreadful hints he has
You are no-stranger to every looliSn impi-
need not then telhyou how hai?<S^^ is she irj-
Sirmity
^oo The HISTORY of
have been this day employed ;—but the work of Providence must be better than mine ; and however hard the convifition, it must at length prevail.
Mis. Fleetwood has told her friend the first steps of this calamity; to her letter, therefore,
I refer you---Recollenion would be of no ufe
1.0 me upon this occafion.
I think she finishes at our being returned ;— but she did not fee us all: nor is she capable of dispatching the little she did know : that too lies at my door.
We did, indeed return. — I must break off a moment;“r~the remembrance is too much forme.
After great difficulty and labour, we traced out the chairmen that carried the fweet girl;—^ they were drunk,—and barely capable of giving us Some imperfefil information.
— They had forced her into a chaiSe,and she was gone for Kilkenny.
We instantly took post-horfes; -—three Servants and ourfelves, with arms, was no inconfi-derable body. They had changed hcrfes once, — had met with an accident to retard their expedition ; but had much the start of us.
However, we continued our chafe and, be» tween three and four in the morning perceived, by the help of the moon, a ca'riage flying at a
distance.
Lord Finly and Mr. Bradshaw pushed, for-jpvaists ;—a fellow fired at them, but happily mif-
’ them, and was Secured.
now all of us furrounded.the cbaife; — held out her dear ha’-ds in the bitternefs ifs ” (Smith was evidently drawing fome-front pocket) and whilst we ste-
Mr. RADSHpg fbould be endangered,—shot
T TARRY ! nh	^
T X not feek to k
Miss S O M M E R V I L 301
Can you now not conceive the effefl So cruel a difaster must have upon our hearts I—for to describe even my own feelings,—is beyond my best abilities I
Lord Finly was the only perfon that did not utter Suitable exclamations I —I apprehended the fatal confequence.
“ My Lord, (Said I) you had better alight.”
“ I am well, fir; (returned he, with miferable wildnefs)—Satisfied, fir ;—perfefitly Satisfied. ‘‘ It does not hurt me:—Ido not bleed :—it was not me he wounded.”—“ What do you mean, fir, by your question ?—Did I complain ?” Thus he run on, until the violence of his disorder broke forth, when-----
The Servants fecured the monster,—Bradstiaw entered the chaife and raifed the lovely body:—•
the ball had pasted through her heart!------
We returned, I told you; — the roads were but indifferent; — we clapped a couple more
horfes for the fake of expedition ;----they had
not got much above thirty miles.-^----
Bradstiaw and myfelf Supported — acrofs our laps she lay ; — and we as anxiousty guarded a-gainst every shock 6T the carriage as if—but the , tendernefs was needieSs — AiT'fenfe of Suffering was at an end.
The moon shone full upon her dear face ; —
I clofed her eyes;-----that was not the bufinefs
' I hoped to have been engaged in—the very day too-------
Could any one behold her, and be an infidel; — the happinefs that waited her was poor and defpicable to what she now enjoys—and may Finly follow her, and I shall be refigned.
This world is not the place our fooliSn impious hearts should doat upon; yet luch is the Infirmity
302 The HISTORY of
firmity and corruption of our nature that common incidents affe6l us, for a short period only: the death that is preceded by what we call a natural caufe, passes Soon off our minds-and our extravagant and abfurd attachment to our follies is renewed, — unmindful that the next Summons may reach ourSelves.
Providence, therefore, in mercy viSits us with fuch great calamities, as I have now fo imperfectly described,—and shall we not read all the meaning of it ? — Beauty, fortune, youth, and virtue, at once were blasted, as a proof of the vanity of the first;—and that the reward of the last is lodged beyond the grave.
She has died for the benefit, the eternal advantage, of thofe for whom she would have lived :— we that Survive, tremble at the horrible catastrophe ! — but the beloved Sufferer’s pang was merely momentary 1—and Lord Finly, once delivered from his deplorable state, the com-pofure of a Christian, will once more be mine.
I must acknowledge,.that nothing ever touched me nearer than this Lady’s misfortunes.
—But, my young friend, I have been frequently taught that 1 essbjn of morality, that can never be learnt in the temple of gaiety. Many dear companions have dropped at my feet!—the arrows of death flown every-where around me 1— yet was I preferved to extra^i a bleffing from the calamity of thofe I held fo dear! —vForgive the refleO^ions of an old man, whofe love of the dead can never be extinguished, and whofe good wishes for the living will terminate only with his existence, lam, fir, &c. Shugburgh,
L E .D
Miss S O M M E R V I L E. 303
Stt«tttS3|9
LETTER LXXVI.
Mr. Bradshaw to Mr. Fleetwood.
Finly is gone ;—in every reSpefl favoured beyond your friend ;— the happiest lover, and the happiest mourner.
They will be buried together,—and I will attend them.
Lord Kennington is greatly altered ; — but who is not, that ever knew the lovely fufferer !
The wretch will receive the common punishment the law inflifls; but it is abundantly too lenient for Such a butcher!
A Servant in Lord Kennington’s family, it appears, was in league with him :—he has efcaped for the prefent; but mifery will overtake him.
We are to embark as (oon as the melancholy office is performed! Was it not for the worthy Shugburgh, we should lofe our humanity in our affli6lion!
But it is at best most hardly Sustained I Mr. and Mrs. Fleetwood,—^ Oh, meet us at Chester! and help to chear them! — I can do
nothing,—• even for myfelf.-
Lady Sarah is the only rational perfon:—her heart is flint— and fecure from every impreffion.
Adieu, my friend ! What were your trials in comparison of mine?—But Mr. Shughurgh— he shall teach us to bear our stifSerings with propriety, and derive benefit from every pang I
The End of the SECOND VOLUME
'rk
U. of Pal Ubrapyi
I
NEW BOOKS oS Entertainment,
Publlflied by D. Chamberlains, W. Sleator, J. Potts, J. Williams, and C. Ingham.
The History and Adventures of
An A T O M.
N
By the Author of Roderick Random.•
(Price fewed 2S. 2d. bound 2s. S^d.)
____ ^ _______________________
The History of
EMILY MONTAGUE.
By the Author of Julia Mandeville.
In Two Volumes.
(Price fewed 4s. 4d. bound 5s. 5d.)
mam	.... ....... ..........
CONSTANTIA
and her Daughter Julia.
An Italian Hiftory; with a Difcourfe on Romances, \	(Price fewed 2s. 2d. bound 2s. 8|d.)
i
The HISTORY of Lord Clayton and Mifs Meridith.
*
(Price fewed 2 s, 2d. bound 2S. S^d.)
\
>
NEW BOOKS of Entertainment.
L E T T E R S
CONCERNING THE
PreSent State oS the French NATioist,
•* \
Containing a comprehenfive View of its
Political State,	I	Ranks of the People,
Agriculture,	Manners,
Trade and Comme?*..,'*	Laws,
Revenues,	I	Fine Arts	and	Artilis,
Military Power,	-|	Theatre,
Government,	j	Literature	and	Writers.
With a complete Compariion between
France and Great Britain.
(Price fewed 4s. 8d. bound 5s. 5d.)
t
LETTERS on Different Subjects.
In Four Volumes.
Among which are interfperfed
^ The Adventures of ALPHONSO, after the Deftruflion of Lilbon.
By Mrs. Pennington.
(Price fewed 4s. 4d. bound 5s. 5d.)
■7
NEW BOOKS of EntertaiNMBNT. TALES of Inatulla of Delhi.
t
Tranflated from the Perfian.
f
(Price fewed 2S. 2d. bound 2s. 8id.)
TRUE DE LICACY;
OR,
The History of
Lady FRANCES TYLNEY,
and HENRY CECIL, Efq.
(Price fewed 2s. 2d. bound 2s. 8id.)
The History of
Major Bromley, and MiSs Cliffen.
**
(Price fev/ed 2s. 2d. bound 2S, Sid.)
The History of the REIGN of The EMPEROR CHARLES V.
With a View of the Progrefs of Society in Europe, from the Subverfton of the Roman Empire, to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century.
By William Robertson, D D. Principal of the
Univerfity of Edinburgh, &c.
In Three Volumes.
(Price fev/ed 14s. bound i6s. 3d.)
imm c lONCHtti
N E W B O O K S of Entertainment.
-it
V'
f
T	R A V E L S
THROUGH
G	E	R	M	A	N	Y.
Containing Observations on
Cuftoms,	Commerce,
Manners,	Arts,
Religion,	and
Government,	| Antiquities.
With a particular Account of the Courts of Mf.cklenburgh.
I
-	in a Series of Letters to a Friend.
By Thomas Nugent, L. L. D. Fellow
of the Society of Antiquaries.
• * • ■
In Two Volumes.
(Price Sewed 4s. 4d. bound 53. 5d.)
agreeable UGLINESS;
O R,
7	The Trumph -.of the Graces.
f
} c/
jC'^GfJ y.^
, / /"t 1/ / /67 1S^
6If Id. ‘^'
4
b
f >	^	_^A	.	> ‘V .
1	I
. EISTOS! OF
i:iss i
SCMMESmil