II 1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11 (A)	12	13	14	15 '■
39.12	65.43	49.87	44.26	55.56	70.82	63.51	39.92	52.24	97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06	62.15
13.24	18.11	-4.34	-13.80	9.82	-33.43	34.26	11.81	48.55	-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19	■ -1.07
15.07	18.72	-22.29	22.85 >	-24.49	-0.35	59.60	-46.07	18.51	1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28	0.19
23	24
72.46	72.95
-24.45	16.83
_55.93_	_68.80,
\ .
. ■ f
					'	■	.	•	'	
										
									.	■- ' ■ W ' ' - .'R
		\		M		\ ,	.	/	t	
.									..	• -;N ' ■ • VN-
					•			-	•.	T‘. ' ^ -
							.		' • y	
. •					/		•	• ■ (. ■ . '	7 "	-f.y V.' j
			*					1 ' ' -	t • - ' . r • • V ' / 'V/ ■' ■■ ■•:	
								'.‘V . » .	■ A.d.	'V
								:	' ■. n .	** ••; '
								' %		'i j
				*					. : ifi	.Vf -
,	-		P							
4 T
J '

s,
■ ^ ;
	i ‘ »-v.
	/ •
• C.r,' L	“ » - 1 '■r- - ritfVri ■-V . . ' N-
V . •.’i >- • . » C’>- '•	*> ‘ * . / •
'f' V •	. ‘1 ‘ ‘
‘ s	/• • • -A-
t 4	: ■ ,• V ■ v” .7
	’ ' C-’V f ■■ -iV' <
, 4


V,.
\ r
i.
s ..
V • ■	*.	..
' »

.•• >■
s
- ♦ > .
{


' - . » ^ . V • . ■ ^ *n r?t' <,'	V, • V .’C":
N> ■V' ■ : 'V	r
f-	' *• /'
	•
	
	
<5	
/
«r
L »
'S
4 ,
K
sj.
t •	. '
■y



f ^


s
/**■ »
%
•'-«;/■ L
• ''* ■*•. • 1
.-•CVh:' .V, , <y d
E. Lloyd,
Rhagatt.

'155*3

*
■’Ti**'.'-. ■—i
t \y 1
•r
i . -vjAtf-y??’
■ . *■	^ ■ ELC-tevT.C.'

* ?

■-kr-
- \ ^
#
■ < ^
r

*.'5=5f':
■^'\ * *
N,	CC

9 e •
^9


i' ^
T HE
R
I
N K
E
A
N
O
V
E
A
L A B Y-
LONDON,
Fiioted for T. Lo w N D E s, No. 77. in Fleet-Street;
MDCCLXXIV.
0
/



[
I
I



THE
R
I
N K
E
f I Q 1 .
LETTER I.
Mty} Seaton to Lady Eliza Beau-
clerk.
NDEED, my Eliza, it is impoHi-
the pidlure ^
ble to overcharge
O
lady Amelia is truly original 5 and her Swain had furnilhed a fairer fub-je(5t for romance, than any wandering hero of antiquity, Ad:on Hall, our prefent habitation, you would Swear had been for many centuries the fa-
VOL. I.
B
vourite
/
2
The Trinket.
vourite receptacle of diftrelTed damSels. A mote, a draw-bridge, and a maftiff have continued for ages a protection to the fair inhabitants. The walk are overgrown with ivy j nor are the veltiges of time lefs confoicuous with-

in the manlion. You are then in pofleffion of the very retirement you widied ; your fituation perfectly romantic.”—True, my Eliza; and foil-
tilde’s the nurfe of grief.
This aw-^
full ftilnefs—the dillant waterfall
the crickets dirge;; what do they but Touze refleClion, and renew ideas alas! too fondly cherifhed : furely my friend, ’tis lawful to indulge the virtuous forrow, to recolleCt the belt of parents—to recall his dying words, when prefling my hand to his fcarce beating heart, “ My Emma, faid the expiring faint, you have Itill a father,” and funk lifelefs on his pillow. Vainly have you endeavoured to difclofe feme latent meaning j your wandering
fancy,
T'h e Trinket.
3
, ever on the wing in Search of happinefs for Emma, muft flill return unfatisfied from every fond excurlion. You know,my dear girl, even at School, how widely different our tempers ; I never confidered things fludlDating on the dream of time as proper ob-je6fs of attention j not able to unriddle the Secrets of futurity, I borrowed eareleffnefs from mydery : and though I might frequently loSe the pleaSure of anticipated delight, I knew not to torment mySelf with fancied dreams of Sorrow. I am certain you will, as uSual, laugh at what you term my w'ant of penetration ; be it So, for I confeSs I See no other allulion but to the hand of Omnipotence. Yes, my much loved parent, your Emma has
dill a Father, exempt from fickneSs, Sorrow, change, or death; it is that Father, who railed me friends in mif-fortune, and taught content to rear her
B 2	dands
4
The Trinket.
flandard even in the regions of affliction.
But you are, perhaps, impatient to be introduced to my young friend ; you fay you are prepared to love her for her kindnefs to your Emma ; yet, believe me, were you acquainted with the engaging girl, her unaSTuming merit would gain the greateft (hare of that friend 111 ip, you kindly hatter me I have long polTelTed unrivalled.—In Fanny Sydney is all the fweet domef-tic foftnefs, the amiable folicitude for others happinefs, which can fprin from a heart, tender, benevolent, never agitated by dilappointment, or triumphantly exulting in fuperiorcharms: ffle is naturally lentimental j in con-verling with her, a thoufand new ideas agreeably furprife you, and a more than female foftnefs receives additional graces from the fprightly failles
cr
of an untutored imagination
Pity
this amiable girl Ihould be So entirely
depen-
* L


‘	4
The Trinket.
5
dependent on the caprices of lady Amelia : thefe old maiden aunts flill continue to their female expectants the fame tyrannic au(ferity, which they would perfuade us was neceffary to check the ardors of an adoring crowd.
Mr. Sydney is (hortly expected; he is about three and twenty, and in pof-feffion of an unincumbered eftate of eight hundred a-year. Lady Acton doats upon her nephew, and declares him, if he marries with her approbation, foie heir to her immenfe wealth. Fanny calls—I fly—to admire a nect of wood pigeons or Friezland hen.
LETTER II.
Lucius Sevigny, Efq. to Augustus-
Sydney, E/y..
X^ILL you have the goodnefs Sydney to read what I (liall write to you, that I may have the con Sola-
B3
tion
\
6
The Trinket.
I
tion of having commimicatcd a fev?n-ideas to one rational being j for, upon’ my honour, except Belvidera Finchley^, there is not fuch a thing within twenty, miles of this place.-—And yet, that Belvidera has Spoiled the only rationaL plan of amufement, my genius, darkened by thefe veiierable Iliades, has atr chieved fince it has been enveloped^ here.—^Yes faith, there is a very pretty girl in the neighbourhood, whom I. had jull marked for my own j as L conceived by her diftreired circum-dances and pallid locks, that her fe-ducer, actuated by feme jealous love-^ fit, had boarded her in the village.
My plan went on divinely, the echoes, had learnt the Soft founds of Sevigny, and all had been well; when the a*, bove-mentioned gentlewoman having heard of my viiits, by her Sober lec--tures, and her goodnefs-^I think Patty
calls it—overturned the whole fabric
» 4»
I had been rearing, perfuaded the rich;
Mifs.
The Trinket.
7t *
file 1 ives with, to take her into her houfe, and I cannot tell you what. Convinced the girls would expedt
me to look foolilh the next time I ac-
• /
coded them, I determined on disappointing them,—and meeting Belvi-dera on horSeback, accompanied bushy a Servant, “ Ah ! my dear miSs Finchley, Said I, how fortunate this rencontre, I have been dying thefe two days to congratulate you on the new ofhee you have undertaken—-confelTop and let me fee—protedtor too, of *uirgm innocence^ with a farcaSlic accent.
How, replied die, upon my word'
1 don’t underlland you.” “ No, I dare fay you don’t—why yes, I always thought the Magdalen houfe a very pretty inftitution, but the poor girl, t fuppofe,—no friends belonging to the

“ If Mr. Sevigny, you mean the pleafure I have been fo fortunate to
B 4	acquire
8
The Trinket.
acquire Mifs Darcy, in the company
of—.	“ Oh lord ! Oh lord ! I beg
your pardon, cried I, I beg your pardon j far be it from me to lefTen fo exquilite a fatisfadtion—good morning to you> I did not before totally comprehend your good fortune.”—-And turning down a lane which led me home, was met by my Servant, who told me there
waiting for me with a letter.-—Judge my alfoniShment when, on breaking the feal, I found it iigned by my old fchool-fellow Harlow
was a
perSon
figure to yourfelf my feelings,,, when I there faw it was his filler whom I had endeavoured to feduce from the before unforSaken paths of virtue. It feems the girl had, for the only imprudent thing She had ever done, quitted her mother’s houfe, who was trying to prevail on her to marry a rich old fellow^ but fhe had fixed her heart upon a han-dSome' young one ; whofe uncle however, would not let
hira
T HE T R I N K E T. 0
him marry without S thouSand poundsj^ to clear a debt he contradded in the folly of a youthful frolick, that done, he would give him up a farm of three hun--dred a-year: the thing was impoffible.
Mrs. Harlowe had but a fcanty jointure j and her Son, honed Jack, found a-commiffion in the army brought with' it as many expences as it could Supply. Importuned by her lovers, teized by au^ avaricious old woman-—(he quitted’ them all, and retired to that placet where my. evil genius led me, Har-* lowe’s'letter was to tell me the Iltua-'-tion in which he had found affairs on* his return from foreign quarters : that from a friend of his filler’s he had* learned her retreat-—recollected it waS'
knew me fo’
in
ouF neighbourhood
generous I v/ould undertake to prevail on her to return to her friends, who^> would welcome her with rapture, &c.-See. Fired with gratitude to the noble: Finchley, I ordered my horfes, and-

B
5
0^1
10
T H E T R 1. .K E T^..
on my arrival at Mr. .Darcy’s, had the good fortune to meet her in the hall t the fenSations of Jafher rullied upon my mind, and Seizing her hand,** Oh, Belvidera, doubly I’m a beggar j undone by fortune, and in debt to thee.’^ Obrerving my unfeigned emotions, (he
ftarted, ** Good heavens, Mr. Sevig-vff'—I put an end to her allonifh-
i
ment by giving her the letter. But L fhall Surfeit you with narration. Suffice' it, I feel for the hrft time the deficiency of fortune ; I inuSl: nit upon-fome means to make thoSe happy,, whom my gaiety had, but for MiSs-Finchley, before now rendered for; ever miSerable. As to my lady grand-iTiotlier, £he has not an idea beyond a>
f
church—or a card table—I dare fay (lie would pray very heartily to God,, tliat he would bleSs Mifs Harlowe.' with a thoufand pounds ^ nor would' the cheat her of a red ace—nay, perhaps even of a matadore, for the Indies,


The Tr'inket;
11
dies. But to give her the fum-—the Lord help fuch narrow fouls.
,V’


LETTER III.
_ W
Augustus Sydney, Efq*' Lucrus


Se VIGNY'.
Y£
on you, Sevigny^ you injure
my friendlhip,.- to know my abi- * lity and not command it. I inclofe a ' draught on my hanker for a thoufand-pounds, which I infil: on your making ' ufe of as you pleafe : nor feat dillref-hng-meT lady Amelia lavifhes upon "* me the gifts of fortune to profufion and- I coniider mySclf as unfpeakablyL indebted to you, for the fatisfadion cT having aliirted any one fo nearly con«^ neded with a young fellow I always ■ thought So highly of as Harlowe. As '

B 6
.y
A
12
The Trinket.
to the girl, I am only aftonilhed Mils Finchley popp’d in time enough j fo-litude and Such a lover as Sevigny—I thought no garrISon could have fof-tained the liege a week. I am afraid the fober matrimonial Swain will ap-
pear but hum-drum after it.
A. pro-
pos hum-drum—Really I am aSfo* nilhed you have the patience to Submit to that enperpetually. We have the mod divine routine you can conceive, and willi continually your wit and elegance of conversation 5 I know of nothing elfe to render it complete. But, after all, do be So good to flay where you are. Such an animated fellow as you—ah, we have ail in our turn found the impoffibility of contending with you.—Mon dieuy Charles Willmott, arid another or two, have been waitine for me this half hourt but I could not reconcile my Self to the idea of deferring for one pod, my jufb
re-
/
T H E T R r N K E T.

reproaches, for your want of confix
dence in,
Dear Sevigny, -
Yourever faithful' Augustus Sydney-
LET T E R IV.
Eliza Beauclerk, to Mifs
Sea ton. .
O V/ prithee, child, from what
new discovered colony was thy lad letter dated ? a draw-bridge, a maftiff, and old maid j I was absolutely in the vapours : “ Here Betty bring the fal volatile, and order this paper to be printed in the next marvellous chronicle:’* but at the glimpSe of a beau near the bottom of your page, away flew vapours, eflences, and and Spleen. Your Pallor Fido is< ,I fuppoSe, . by this, time-arrived : well>
heave
n


The T’r I nk e tn
Heaven be praifed, this is as it {houMi' be; that pretty face muff again try itS’ power in charming j and let me tell you, Emma, when you are Mrs. Sydney, and have pulled down thofe old mouldering walls, hung the maftifF, and the old maid, Adon Hall will be-a perfed Arcadia. Prithee, my good girl, try your hand at description; there-is. Something extremely laughable in the well painted follies of theTortu-nate, and Thave known one of thefe^ envied beings fhed more tears for the lofs of a linnet, a coach-horfe, or a
than my Emma, when mif-fortune, like a peftilential blaff. Swept off her opening bloom of happinefs; The caftle is at prefent crowded with inhabitants, yet, I dare not declare-myfelf Surrounded by companions ; notwithlianding Mr. Beauclerk is perpetually discovering Some agreeable
s
attradion, of latent good quality in every individual. Surely, my dear, it
\



T E T RT N K E T;
15:;
is a mark of underflanding, to view every object in the moft agreeable "
, and there is a certain elevated -; benevolence neceflary to behold whato is amiable in others,which little minds want. . Never did your friend fo much ■ feel her inferiority to be unmoved with -repeated endeavours to divert,' as de- • notes inSenfibillty ; but we are Seldom pleaSed when we are made to feel the weight of obligations—-when we are^ given to underftand we fhould be fen- -
fible of them ; and


i •/
Vly Eliza are
you not yet happy;’' has diffipated many plealing-vilions.—Good God, are thefe the Sentiments of my friend and can fhe be thus ungrateful?”
Be not aftonilhedjEmma; you,who are ufed to trace every paflion to its Source, cannot be ignorant that the highefl: pleafure arifes from accidental occurrences, and is never farther off' than when we meet to Seek it.—Hea- • vens, what a difTertation ! Sufficient,
indeed,^.
\

* /
The T r I n k e
s
indeed, to baniSh the goddefs I at
tempt
to disregard.
We are to have
a dance to-night in the Saloon j moff of the neighbouring gentry are invited, and we have here lord M—, Mr. Elford, Sir Charles Waybridge, MiSs Montagues, lady Caroline, MiSs Lennox, and your old acquaintance Mrs^ Dixon.—Fye, Emma, what a description of my intended aunt, ** Proud,
envious, and deceitful.
99
BleSs me.
child, with what eyes didfl thou regard her; the very pidure of humility j fhe would floop even to worfhip, tlie ground I tread on ; I have heard her contradid: herfelf twenty times in a breath,'in compliance with lady Caroline i and who Shall fay She is not a-bove that low envy, which delights in-depreciating thofe of her fex, who boaft Superior graces •, Since none more clearly perceives, or more readily admits their charms; but our Mrs. Dixon carries her jullice ffill higher, and.
wifely.

The T r I n k e t.
T7
wifely conlidering theSe fair ones Sufficiently dillinguifhed by the fmiles of nature, flie referves her favours for the aukward, the rich, the fortunate 5 nor is there a
of envy in this; fhc is of opinion that beauty every where finds Shelter. I am interrupted —Adieu.

LETTER V.
Augustus Sydney to Sir George
Danvers.
'^^ELL—^if I had but a good be-’ nefice in my gift, I’d make it a condition, when the reverend father was introduced, that he Should infert in the Litany, ,
From maiden aunts, and antiquated manjions. Good Lord deliver us.
And yet in truth Danvers, green fields and Shady groves are not the odious
things I thought them y the fame old
gen-
\
I'^S
The Trinke

gentlewoman
*
has planned, and my kind liars have perfedled, the mofi pleafurahle feheme.—But to metho-dife my thoughts —— a thing that, George, in which you muff confeSs me uncommonly fuccefsful: it was about eight o’clock when I arrived, of courfe a delightful evening,-—the country
A Snow of bloflbms, and a wild of flowers,
Fanny knew me at a diffance, and ran out to meet me, ** My dear brother ! how am L rejoiced to fee you.”—We embraced, and (he conduced me to the drefling room-—lady Adton receiv ed me with pieafure j and I was lif-
A
CC

tening to my
s entertaining prat
tie, when an elegant female entered the apartment j a fmall chip hat nightly Shaded the inofl animated countenance. Fanny rofe, and taking me by the hand, “ Mifs Seaton, give me leave to introduce my brother
Sydney, receive my friend.” I
Salute hcr> muttered
\
fame-
T H E T RINK E T. ' 19
fbtuething of unexpedled happinefs flole a look in the glafs—-the disorder of my hair —with the agree-
addi-yet
given an
able Surprize, had t’ional glow to my complexion the gypfy was unmoved with my ap pearance, and rcGeived my compli ment with great unconcern :
(•
it was-
not t'o be endured and vowing vengeance on the little ruftic, I threv/-myfelf upon the Sofa, complained of
fatigued—the roads were in-tolerable—folicitude for my aunt’s healthy and the apprchenlion that too much retirement might affect Spirits,, had induced me to attend her ; hut had I known She had Such agreeable company, (bowing to mifs Seamy return had been for a fhort •.
time retarded. Lady Amelia inquired where my tormenting inSenfible had been ffroiling, in the grove, madam, I: never Saw it more delightful.” And your reflections, Mifs Seaton,
cried
2*3
The Trinket.
cried I j come, confefs the happy oh-jedt that engrofled them.” “ The object that claimed my attention, fir, has no connection with the epithet you beftow,”—-She faid^ and vanish-
ed, flight
Mighty prudent this, and her a modeft confeflion that She
felt her danger. O, you are certainly all impatience, to learn what peculiar beauties this fair one boafts; but really George, it is impoSIible I Should inform you, for in the truly compre-henfive phrafe, “ She beggars all description.”
When fhe appears, all nature halls the Spring, And warbling birds their Sportive carrols ling.’*^
Ha, ha, ha ! admirable.
€C
Like Phcebus Sung the no. leSs, amorous boy,. Like Daphne She,, as lovely and as coy.’’
If her Sentiments are as delicate as-her form, I Sliall conflder my heart a tribute to her merit i but to the im-pceSTions of mere beauty, no Stoic can
be
The Trinket.
zi
he more infenlible.—Fanny informs me the fair unfortunate has lately loft a favher, and with him each flattering expc6tation. Forced through fome unaccountable fatality to change hk name, and fly his country, with all the money he pofTelTed, he purchafed annuities, which ceafed with his life. He was naturally expenfive; fondly floating on his daughter, he fpared no expence on her education, her hou-fe, her drefs, or her attendants,; they lived up to their little income, and on his deceafe mifs Seaton found herfelf deftitute. Fanny flew
to her.
on hearing
the melancholy
news : an affedlionate friendlhip had fubfifted between thefe amiable girls from infancy. She endeavoured to prevail on the dear fufferer to quit the hoafe of mourning ; but all entreaties were ineflfedual, and fhe .continued there till the remains of her parent
were
depofited
m
the
grave
the
friends
ndl
T'h e T r t n ’k e t.
friends have been fince infeparabte* Heavens! you may difcover my Soli^ tary fituation in my ffyle ilrangely unlike your
Sydney;
LETT E R VI.
Mifs Seaton to Lady Eliza Beau
CLERK.
‘HpHIS redoubtable hero is at length
arrived, and lady Eliza once more miftaken. Pray, my dear friends '•of what combuilible materials did you imagine your Emma’s heart com-pofed, that it fhould catch fire at every light gay meteor of a fpark ?” I grant Mr. Sydney handfome, his per-fon nobly engaging, and in his con* verfation, is “ humour, wit, a native air and grace and yet I behold him approach with indifference ^ he leaves me, and I do not regret his abfenccj he reafons, and I can think his princi-
6	pies

T
HE Trinket.
23
tiles ill founded, and his conclufions -.erroneous; I can be ferious when he laughs, and laugh when he is ferious. Sir Harry Edgerton, a particular in tit-mate of Mr. Sydney’s, has been with us fome days : it would be difficult to conceive a more prepolTeffing appearance ; he carries a letter of recommendation in his countenance; and it is impoffible to look at, and not efteem him. His addrefs is eafy and unaffected ^ and his converfation, always in-flruCtive, is enlivened with a certain native chearfulneSs. Lady Amelia af-fured me lafl: night, this man, in my idea fo perfeCl, had yet a fault : Ah, my Eliza ! can then excefs of virtue “ rife to faults,” and the exuberance of
?
humanity become a failing I
“ Sincere himfelf, and too Secure to find The common boSom, like his own, fincere.’*
His heart and time are become the property of the unhappy 5 and diftrefs
is
•-r V.
'#4
24
The T R I N K E T.
is an indilputable title to his fortune.
From the peculiar tendernefs of hi
manners, one would imagine he had
felt the forrow he relieves ; and there
is an engaging foftnefs in his carriage
when he addrelTes a woman, that
fpeaks our fex the caufe of his afflic-
tion. Since his arrival, our little co-
terie is become infinitely more interefi:
mg
Mr. Sydney is extremely atten-
tive to him, and every day feems to
increafe their friendihip: could you
have believed it poffible, this young
man, all frolic, life, and gaiety, de-
clares he never is fo happy as in his
Edgerton’s company. Where Shall
we find a clearer proof, that parity of
inclinations is not elfential to the
union of fouls; and that the flrongefl:
friendihips are cemented between
people of contrary diSpofitions :
Sydney’s exceffive vivacity is tempered
by the fentimental converfation of his
alfociate 3 and Sir Harry’s infirudive
cheat-
The T r I n k e t.
2$
n
a
cliearfulnefs appears with charms, contrasted with the
dditional
levity
of his friend. Lady Amelia’s fwain
thought proper to leave the neigh-
bourhood upon her nephew’s arrival :
Strange, that a woman of her age
Should give the flighteft encourage
menti yet Fanny aSTures me he has
long fighed at her feet j and as nurfes
terrify their charge
bugbears
lady Amelia liftens to the wretch She
defpifes, to quicken her Sydney’s affi-
■duity. Though gay, luxurious, ex-
pensive, and convinced his Slender pa
trimony cannot Support him in the
life he loves, he ridicules the old la-
dy’s peculiarities, and laughs at her
admirer. We pafs the rofy bo
fom’d hours” in variety of rural plea-
sures, and have the moSI enchanting
concerts in the grotto. MiSs Sydney
is perfedl miflreSs of mulic, and Strikes
the harpSichord with great taSfe; I
frequently accompany her with the
Nol. I,
C
guittar^’

6
The Trinket.
««>
I#
guittar, Sir Harry plays the violon cello, and Mr. Sydney excells upon the dute. We are preparing for one this evening; Lady Amelia is engaged s and Fanny, in gaitee de cceur, warbles her native wood-notes ■wild” beneath my window. — Ah, I fee her with Sir flarry I they turn down the walk leading to the grotto; adieu, I go to join them.
V.
In Continuation.
I expected to find Fanny and Ed-gerton in the grotto, and ran in with a fprightly air, intending to chide them for leaving me.—1 ffarted, furprifed to fee Mr. Sydney alone, in a melancholy attitude : I would have withdrawn, but he arofe, and feizing my hand, Tell me, mifs Seaton, why nature formed thofe beauties, and denied the gift that Should accompany them—a feeling heart	Fortunately
forme, our friends entered the grotto:
the


2
The Trinket.
27
the Surprize, his apparent thoughtful-nefs, quickly changed to the moll: animated appearance, left me incapa-
ble of reply.

Edgerton, Said he.
we have waited for you this age ; the indruments are in tune, allons doncP and preffing my hand, which he dill held, to his heart, with they gayed air imaginable he warbled
“ You firft have taught me how to love.
Ah teach me to be happy too.”
The indruments were however foon laid down, and after a (hort time the conversation became Spirited on all ddes ; it fell on the old topic, the levity of females, and incondancy in love and friendfhip., Mr. Sydney rallied our follies and trifling peculiarities with infinite pleafantry. We proved the gentlemen overcharged the pidure, and Spoke worfe of us than we deferved, and we triumphed over the accufation, by leSTening the credit of the accufers, —In all ages, Eliza, wife
C2
and

28
The Trinket.
and malice have been employed in inventions detrimental to the fair j and if the men are not equally ridiculed, it muff furely be, that their faults are fo confpicuous, there is no ingenuity in expoling them.
LETTER VII.
Mifs Finchley to Mifs Melville.
LJEAVENS I I expire with ennui:
thirty miles from the metropolis, and not a pretty fellow to diffipate the melancholy reflection ! commend me to your fober damfels, w'ho, to prove their domeflic virtues, are eloquent in commendation of tufted groves,
O	^
flowering lawns, &c. beauties, in my opinion, then only charming, when pointed out by an enlivening fwain, who poIfelTes the happy art of faying agreeable things, and Swearing
“ The whiteft lilies to our beauties yield,”
Mifs
The T r I n k e t.
29
MiSs Darcy, on the contrary, finds no failure of amufement-—good fouli the contemplation of that fweet per-fon never wearies. Thus lovely, llie
w'
would inSpire file knows not what ; while flattery foothes, it pleaSes, it de-
her, it clothes in words her foie ideas, “ and gives her back the
image
of her imind :
a fmart coat,
a cockade, a. fhoulder knot, or a pair of red heels add irrefiftible douceurs to admiration. Would you not imagine this girl, immured with her father,,mother, and my ladyfliip, languishes for a compliment—no fuch thing; felf-applaufe is a fubftitute, by habit become familiar.—Blefs-me,
my watch informs me his paft the toilet-hour, and we are engaged this evening at lady Amelia Adion's—a mofl: deledable vifit; our hopeful entertainment anecdotes of the pafl:, rendered more palatable by curious reflections on the woeful degeneracy.
C3
while
3°
The Trinket.
while what will the world come to,” is echoed, from the fage matron to the venerable fpinifer. Ah, how I abominate the idea.
In Continuation.
Quite enlivened, child j no Solitude,, yawns, or dejedion f papa looks prodigiously important, mama Simpers, and miSs vows *tis ffrange, ** his paffing ffrange”—'ffrange indeed—A man, Lucy,—a man !—Imagine us Seated at lady Alton's—the Servant brought the tea-table, and it was followed by (happy Darcy) a well drefSed youth : lady Amelia introduced her nephew; my friend alternately examined her gown, her ruf-flles, and her head*drefs with apparent triumph.
Augustus (in company with four, let me tell you, no deSpicable females) appeared with aftonifhing indifFerencei. compiimerited Darcy, laughed with
A
The Trinket.
31
me, and Smiled on the inlinuating mifs Seaton : no grand Turk was ever more at eafe, or leSs difconcerted, than the well-bred Sydney. Our old folks prolonged the vilit : their Charlotte’s eharms muft fix the wanderer; fhe thought So too, and when the carriage was announced, fwam off elated with her conqueft: he handed her to it, and fwore Adlon Hall would appear a defert in her abfence.—This was irre-fi{lible> and Sydney has ufurped the vacancy in her difcourfe : how fortunate were this change, could boundaries be fet to p'raife : liften to Ljr commendations, and you would execrate him, as the only adequate revenge for the tedious harangue politenefs obliged you to attend to :, hear her paint the charms of love, and you would abjure the fond connexion. She is a kind of echo to the paffions, which, did not others talk of, fhe were wholly unacquainted with, and too trifling for fen-
C4
timent
32
The T rIn k e t .
timent; the feelings fhe exprelTes are to be found only on her tongue.
This is your Belvidera’s friend ah, Ts to prophane the title : thefe fe=^ males love, but, believe me, they are incapable of friendfhip. The exultation of conquefl,, and the tumult of applaufe, charms the imagination ^ the pride of retaining the lover raifes. us in our own opinion y we become important, and feel a partiality.for him who has taught us to refpeft ourfelves»
The bafis of friendfhip is efteem y tender, mild, difinterefled, it derives
't-y.'
its foundation;
we
borrow life and courage from the at-tachmentj. we endeavour to imitate, perfediions we admirej. and we love ourfelves, becaufe we are dear to our friends. This, Lucy, is a paflion I vainly attempt to define ^ but, believe me, when I think of you, my. bofom burns with the tenderefi: fentiments it
L E T
■-4

T HE T R I N K E T%
33
LETT E R VIIL
I
Sir George Danvers to Augustus
Sydney, Efq,
Cloe found Amynfas lying All in tears upon the plain.”
A ! ha !- ha! my poor Sydney,, fighing, deSpairing, dying! faith,. Augulfus, you are a happy fellow •, and, while you divert yourfelf with your fair reclufe, a club of choice fpirits lament. your absence, and a crowd of beauties languilh for your return.
met the ducheSs of
I
and lady
Mary
at Vauxhall.

Is ?
your friend, sun at A<5ton, Sir George i Strange, that fo very fine a fellow. Should abfent himfelf from the Park,, picquet, and theSe dear gardens, immured, I dare Iwear, with a parrot, a: monkey,, and a maiden aunt.”
C 5
4 < ■p.ealiy:?
34
€€
T^h e Trinket Really, ladie?, Mr..
0*f‘
IS
happier than you. imagine j. no wonder the budding fpring, and the more blooming charms of beauty, Should captivate a man of his exquilite taSfe.”
Ha! ha! ha! now, dear
Sir
George, pray inform us what pretty ruftic engroITes his attention y his aunt’s milkmaid. I’ll anfwer for itj or perhaps Some tenant’s daughter claims the dilfingufhing pre-eminence
“ Faith, madam, were I to defcribe

ex-
the charmer in Sydney’s rapturous preffion, your ladyShip might accufe me of infanity, or think I had Scaled;: Olympus to catch the fair idea.”
“ No more excuSes, cried the du— chefs;, here, Danvers, you may rave. with impunity.”
Agreed, Said I,, catching herr hand, tell me, thou charmer,, whence had’d: thou thofe brilliant eyes Soft, white hand ?”
this
« Wretch I
€C
The Tr 1 n K: e t.
Wretch ! you were to have def-*
cribed Mr. Sydney’s fair one.”
“ Impoffible : (he has your height^ your lips, your cheeks, but wants a thoufand namelefs graces you can boaft.”
“ And (he loves your friend
“ No, madam, (he were then even* your fuperior ; always fare to pleafe t the friendly deity arms your fex with-new alurements, points every charm, > and you are doubly irreliftible when^ you have learnt to love.”
A Science that, Danvers, in which; fhe could not have an abler tutor; on' my word^ Venus lent him into the world with full power to reduce all. rebels to her Ifandard.”
And I’ll lay my life. Said lady/ Mary, She has not a more active ge^-neral.”
He bien mon pauvre folitaire!
Is the fair Seaton yet enlided?' what a rout with that fame ani mation
3®
T HE T R I N S E T.
mation : fhew me the woman that eam be inanimate and a Sydney by hec fide : her coldnefs muff be pretended,, mere alFedlation ; and, like chapmen, who praife the goods they would dif-pofe of, fhe would perfuade you her heart is invulnerable, to enhance the value when fhe yields it.-—Prithee
Sydney, introduce your charmer; the woman mull have indeed
“ no cha-
radfer at all” who, in the time you have been acquainted, has not dif? covered Some leading traits. Diredt
...... h
your next letter to me at L——. ihall go there to-morrow, and propofe being abSent about a.week. It mud: he fomething fuperior to the beauty, of the woods that can prolong my ilay : a fprightly widow, a fine girl, or a fociety of beaux e/prit, are three ir* refjftibles, and Share among them the heart> the foul, and perfon of
Your
George Danvers-,.
T H’E T R I N K E T.
37

L E T T E R IX;.
usTus.Sydney to Sir Georgk
Danvers
A STONISHINGi upon my foul.
jf
very aftoniShing !”-—What the
devil have you got now, Sydney ?
methinks you cry—v/hy faith the
moSl; furprifing*—hatch of turkies
The old damfel has been with me, in
her little black bonnet, India hand-
kerchief, and toed clogs (thofe infig-
nias of her poultry-feeding, depart
ment) with as much joy as that wea-
ther-beaten phiz of her’s is capable of
exprefling, recounting the marvellous
tranfadfion

fitting
5 J
Never thought of her “ fo early too”—God
blefs
her, if I did, not really imagine fhe
had humbled upon one of her old
love letters j-—^tho’ to do her juf-
tice* I believe all fhe ever received’ are
fafe

out an
T HT^E T'r i n k f t.
*
fafe in her roSe-wood cabinet.—I remember one day that I had made fome excellent hit in her Scriptural e, and could perceive Lwas in high favour with the venerable Spinfier “ Nephew,, fays She, extending her fpedlacles in one hand, while She laid^ down her work in the other—Ne--phew, I am am going to fetch—the: rent roll of an eftate, thought I, to be-Sure as She opened the door—-but' no—Ihe returned, cpiftle to me, “ Here, Said She with: an air of exultation, here is a letter
from the late celebrated lord L-------j
received at a time of life, when nothing but the mod: determined resolution never to marry, could have prevented my falling a prey to Some one-of my numerous admirers.”—I was-too much mortified to Smile, as I. Should at any other time have done,, and perufed the contents with the ut-mufl; ferioufnefs; It was really clever,.
indeed;,.
holding


i H E
T R I rr K E T .
39^
indeed, madam, faid I, as I finilhed;
it} I could have Sworn Such a letter as that, had been Sufficient to have Sent: half your Sex to the devil.”—“ Nephew, returned ffie, (too much pleaSed with the compliment to herSelf, to re— Sent the SarcaSm on, her Sex) I hope" you will not deny there is woman, who could not be deceived:—Oh, added She bridling, if you knew all the pains that have been taken you would

own
that my good genius prelided over your inclination, interrupted I ConfeSs now, I continued,, that you: had a prefentiment you. was to have a-ncpheW, who would be the moSt ele-
gant fellow in the
kingdom
ah, I
L
am perfjaded nothing elSe could have induced you to continue that goodly. Slate you have choSen. She Smiled at; my impudencej but really I am afraid it is more than you will compliment me with. What Shall I tell you then ? that Some of cur neighbours Spent
veSlerdav

T H E ’T R I N K E T.
Mr
4 a
yefterday with us large fortune—an only daughter who, as I. paSs here for a very fober fellow, he would be glad to marry to my worfhip—his ellate lies fo fnug to my aunt’s j, then I believe the girl, ^Charlotte I think he calls her) would have no fort of objection to the conr-ne^iion—monftrous fond of me—-but. vain, foolifh,. and affedled—I think, they fay ihe is pretty ; may be fo.
She has no merit in my eyes however, but what arifes from the choice, of her companion j a young woman of a good, but unfortunate family, very defer'vedly a favourite, with the dam-fels here.
Yes, Emma has indeed difcovered' fome leading trdAs; and her’s is a-, charaOer the fex iLould be proud to imitate.—The beauties of her mind, are far beyond the reach of my pen to defcribe. With a heart tenderly awake to every emotion of fenfibility,
{h

The Trinket.
41
stie pofTelTes a fortitude a Stoic might be proud to boaft.—Generous without oftentation, her pleaSure in giving is lelTened only by the regret her ability will extend no further:—benevolent from confUtution as well aa principle, She would foften the foibles of others into virtues—and Seems fen-fible to in Sure only that flie may rife fiill more Superior, in the forgivenefs of it.—-With a. chearfulnefs of disposition, which renders her witty with the gay,. Serene with the Serious, Satire never could extort her Smile, and there needs but that the apoStle’s pre-didUon Ihould- be fulfilled in this world, inffead of the next. With what meafure you metey it Jhall be meafured to you againFE for Emma to be perfectly adored.. Modefl:
without prudery affedlation.
polite without fhe has found the
art tO: unite the utmofi: elegance of
modern educ,a£iQn^ with every domef-
42
The Trinket.
tic virtue for which our grandmother& would celebrate the antedeluviaii fair. In a compofure of foul, which can arife only from confcious goodnefs, £he finds confolation under the keenell flrokes of adverfity,—and welcomes affliction as the humble friend of virtue : on the contrary, fenfible to the-flightefi: approach of good fortune, yon fee pleafure dancing in her eye fin-cerity and fweetnefs are her conftant attendants, and add a grace equally ta the altar or the drawing-room.
Such then is the charaDer I love. Such is the companion, the friend, thC' miftrefs I would chufe. How often have I laughed in my fleeve, when I have called a woman an angel, whofc' face to be fure might be pretty, (So. may a devil’s, for, begging the gentlemen of the pencil’s pardon, who that has the power attributed to thofe fpi-rits, would not employ it to render, their appearance pleafing) when her
fenti-^
The Trinket.
43
fentiments were-diabolical enough to fuit the charadler in its fallen Hate. It is Such a difpolition as Mifs Seaton’s
that partakes of the divinity, — the
A
tranlition of her mind from this flate to the other, would indeed be eafy. Hey day ! the devil take it, if thefe mufly walls, and w'orm-eaten folios, have not absolutely metamorphofed the gay, the agreeable Auguftus Syd-* ney, into as dull a fellow, as the veriest preacher of them all. — This Hate—and the other! ha I ha ! ha! you cannot be more aftonifhed than I am myfelf; though, to fay the truth, I have for fome time been afraid, if this dainty damfel Should continue much longer upon thefe earthly premifes. She would ruin me for a fine gentleman. What can I do I yawn eternally then hum a ferap of Italian, fwear a few oaths in fome other language^ left the antiques here Should take the
In Short, Danvers, this exist-
ence
44
T ir E T R I N K E T .
ence is v/orfe than death—is this tO' live f no—“for am I not dead to every^ joyous fenfation—the feathered, and the four-footed inhabitants of this mouldering manfion are on a par with me-—they eat,, and drink, and deep and Sydney does no more. What is become of thofe jovial hours you and I have rattled away together : Oxford,, the dear metropolis,, and a. thoufand other places, recolleO: our names as the gayeft of our fex.—And here, by Jove, when my aunt does leave me her eftate, fhe may as well order me. her bonnet,, her petticoats, and her fpec-tacles to exhibit in, and I’ll engage no. one finds the difference.—The idea is excellent; a month ago, the gallanC gay Lothario God of his inf i
yf
Which a ve-
nerable piece of flarched virginity. ,
I leave, however, my neighbours in the lurch; the young ladies pro-pofed making a party to drink tea at
the
T
T R I N r: E T.
45
•the fummer-houSe in the vvood^ the chits knew I mud attend them, for it was not fafe to go unefcorted; and the elder part of the company would fear taking cold, as it would be late before their return. My whiflcy was brought to the door —— Mifs Darcy
jumped into it
not fo neither.
thought I, a tete-a-tete with you mud be the devil.—MiSs Finchley the fatigue will be too much for you, will
you undertake to drive
Darcy i
?
Mifs Seaton,
walk.”
She
my mounted
filler, and I will
accordingly.
and the rage in Charlotte’s
counte-
nance gave me no fmall fatisfadfion.
They had not gone more than half a mile, when Finchley, who by the tvay was as much diverted as myfelf, declared her companion fnatched the reins out of her hand, pretended ap-prehenfion of her driving too near a tree, and inftantly overturned the •chair. Fictitious fainting fits fuc-
ceeded
..i.
The Trinket
Mifs
MiSs
Such
>attitudes—-fo much languid tender** Tiefs.—Oh, you would have been demolished—for my part, I did carry her in my arms back to the houSe, be-caufe I was obliged to it j but I was all the while continuing a conversation, I was perSuaded flie could hear, with the other girls, whom I forced into it, for they were all of them too •good-natured to enjoy a folly fo evident. Mifs foon recovered however, could not think of breaking up the
party
My
orderedj and we proceeded in mighty good humour, with the addition of papa Darcy, to take care of his daughter.
The ladies Sung, Charlotte did not execute amifs, and requefted my performance. “ Oh, faid I, you have hit upon what I Shall comply with the bell in the world—do you chufe the firffc part of the lafl: cotillion, or
(yawn-

. ,THE Trinket
i(yawnlng) any of the turns in the new opera
** pshaw, faid She, tapping my Shoulder, have you found any tune yet, to Suit thofe words, which I am per-fuaded, are perpetually in your idea.
Horace hill charms with graceful negligence.”—“ Yes, madam, returned I, bowing, the tune of all my actions.”—Quelle bagatelle ! but I have introduced you to my companions; you have no right therefore to expedt any thing better at prefent from
Your
Augustus Sydney
9
LET

The T r I n e t

LETTER X.
Sir Harry Edgerton to Edward
Willis, ESq.
youR laft letter gave me infinite concern—** the weaknefs of your temper Sir Harry, lays you open to
your
fortune
perpetual impofition ;
•cannot anfwer thefe frequent demands^ the extravagant, the profligate, and the luxurious, are by you enabled to continue in their crimes, and triumphing in iniquity, laugh at the miftaken benevolence that fupports them.” Tell me, Mr. Willis, who Shall fix the boundaries of virtue? and what power beneath Omnifcieiice, reftrain the tendered charity ? your Edgerton had rather be the dupe of a thouSand artifices, than through the fear of being impofed on, fail to refcue mifery from diftrefs : the honeft glow of heart-felt gratitude, the artlefs fondnefs of iifp-
ing
V
The Trinket.
49
ing infancy, and one blefling from the lips of faltering age, amply atone the folly you accufe. Heaven hath fixed me in unlimited abundance, and while
i
I can reftore my effate unincumbered to the next pofTeflbr, the yearly income I will difpofe of. Let us then wave the Subject 5 and believe, my Willis, there is an impertinence even in friendfliip, when it would too rigidly controul the harmlefs bias of the mind. I fhall fee you in a few days, (as, notwithflanding my young friend is Solicitous that I Should continue with him, my deflined journey cannot
be deferred ;) and I fhould deem my-felf inexcufable, could any inducement prevail on me to leave England without embracing you.—Sydney has not found Acton Hall the defart he expected j his agreeable Sifter, and in bis idea a ftill fairer inhabitant, enliven the joyous hours. There never was a man fo entirely mafler of ‘‘ all that
VoL. I.
D
can
r

The Trinket.
can Softly win, or gayly charm, the heart of w'oman and I tremble for the amiable Seaton, againSt whom thefe inlinuating graces are exerted. On my firft arrival, fhe treated him with an unreferved familiarity, that Spoke the pleaSed companion, the Sprightly friend, unadtuated by any Softer paflion : but, I know not how, our little parties have inSenSibly degenerated from that enlivening freedom.
She bludies at his unexpected appearance, and fearful that I Ihould have observed the artleSs tefUmony of her affection, her cheeks are again fuffufed with crimSon.—For Sydney, I wilh to See him fincerely, honourably in love a conftant, generous attachment to a deServing objeCt, by giving Stability to his delires, and correcting that exceffive gaiety, too apt to link itSelf in levity, would render him the molt perfeCt of his Sex. By the belt of tutors the precepts of morality
The Trinket.
51
virtuous im
ral'ky were early imprinted on his glowing breaft} nor has the thoiight-lelTneSs of youth, the feducements of diforderly afTociates, or the ridicule of wit, been able totally to eradicate the
ons. Born with Strong fenfibility—gay by complexion, frank, fociable, and unguarded, he is feldom able to relift the folicitations of his unbridled paSlions; and the blandilh-ments of beauty have drawn him into excelTes his reaSon disapproves. The objeD: of univerSal approbation, and drunk with unlimited applauSe, he conliders himSelf as a happy diftin-guiShed being, exempt from the afflictions incident to mankind; and, unaccustomed to disappointment, dreams not the hour approaches, when he will find even the mod: fortunate are
not above the reach oS Sorrow.
MiSs
Seaton’s charms are uncommonly at-tradlive, and the becoming SrankneSs that invites familiarity, is nobly tem-
D 2	pered
52
The Trinket.
ance
?
pered with a modeft dignity that checks the daring lover : entirely dependent on lady Amelia, and of an obfcare family, is it likely She will permit her favourite nephew to demean himfelf by fo unequal an alli-
Sydney too, laughs at Hymen, and turns his pointed ridicule on marriage.
From fuch a profpect, what but mifery avails the fair unfortunate ? fweet fufterer 1 my heart bleeds for
thee.—Tell me, Willis, how can I
«
affiSI her? lhall I inform her Auguftus cannot marry, and loves but to delude.—Ah tell me, lhall I w'ound her delicacy, to infure her heart?—I have employed all the rhetoric I poffefs, in endeavouring to perfuade my friend to accompany me to Bourdeaux ; but he is deaf to entreaties, and, pointing to Mifs Seaton, Anfwer me, Ed-gerton, is it in man to quit that blooming charmer When I attempt
The T r I n k e t.
53
oint-
tempt to look grave, and accuSe his want of friendihip, he difpels the gathering frown by feme unexpected pleafantry. Ah, Mr. Willis, let no man dare to repine at forrow, or ac- . cuSe the afflicting difpenfations of Providence } fince none but the all-wife Beftower can tell what will prove a bleffing or calamity to him, on whom it is beftowed. Misfortunes only confer Self-knowledge; and ments perfeCt virtue. Mr. Sydney has a foul naturally elevated, but, ebn-flantly crowned with prosperity, has
never found occalion to exert the la-
/
y
tent heroifm.- In friendihip be is warm, dilinterelfed, and Sincere : dif-trefs obtains a ready alleviation from his bounty; and modeft merit feels not the obligation he confers. The women he conliders formed, “ faireSt of creation,” for his pallime; he boafts his addrefs- in deceiving them, and Shews bis wit in ridiculing their con-
D3
fidence.
54
The Trinket.
fidence. Oaths, vows, promifes, and' proteifations, are, in his idea, the lover’s play-things | mere bubbles ta cheat the thoughtlefs fair one.
Who is it fays, young men that are not a little unruly give fmall hopes of ever being eminent ? I like not the fentiment——methinks it licenSes irregularity ; unlefs indeed,
“ When reafon, like the fkilful charioteer,. Can break the fiery paffions to the bit.”
Mils Sydney doats on her Augudus,. and repofes in his bofom the mod unlimited confidence; an= afFedfion he repays with intered:, and in his treatment of her, mingles the mod attentive politenefs, with the honed friend-fhip of a brother. In thi-s amiable fociety can my heart be unintereded can it do otherwife than recal the halcyon days of happinefs it once could boad ? Ah, Willis! this fubjedi borders on didradfion: I quit the friendly
circle i
The Trinket.
55
circle; but, alas! whither fhall I -fly ! will change of place exclude purfuing forrow, or variety baniSh thought. But is there not, my friend, a ffill more powerful motive ? Dear, flattering ex-pedation; yes, I will liften to thy foothing promife, for in diftrufling Omnipotence we prove ourfelves unworthy of its bounty.
Farewell, Willis, believe me with the flncerefl: friendihip.
Ever yours,
Henry Edgerton,
\
LETTER XL
Mifs Seaton to Lady Eliza Beau-
clerk.
I R Harry Edgerton left us this morning j and, to atone his abfence, the friekle deity has blelTed us with the molt diverting original in nature
D 4
p a rd on,.
5 6
The Trinket.
pardon, dear Sir Theodolius the ilL placed, epithet: in good truth folly is contagious j thou art not the firft Shallow coxcomb fafhion has made ridi-
/
culous ; and imitation has Seduced many belides thyfelf into infignifi-cance, by inftrudting them to ape the
frailties of their Superiors,
Pytha-
goras, I am told, enjoined his foL lowers a probationary lilence of five years; but Fll lay my life, were Sir Theodofius Airy a public reformer, love, honour, filence, and obedience would be the marriage vow} and the tongue of the woman he loves, a much more acceptable prefent than her hand. This man feems to wage war with filence, his weapon is for ever adfive, and the frightened enemy flies his approach, while every place
he enters re-echoes to bis conquefi:.
Never was dafhed out, at one lucky hit, A fool, So juft a copy of a wit.”
The
The T r I n k e t*
57
The wretch, if we may believe him, is already fufceptible of la belle pajjiom darts, flames, ardors, never dying love.
£
nd unintelligible compliments bave,^ fince the firft hour of his arrival, di-re<fted their irrefiftible baUery againll the fair Sydney, who, poor girl, appears perfectly convinced that there is not on earth a more painful penance than Hflening to the adulation of the coxcomb we defpife.—^Since Sir Harry’s departure Mr. Sydney is more frequent with me; we have the enchanting tete--a-‘tetes; and though his tongue has never owned he loves> a thoufand flattering dillindions are more eloquent.—^I have frequently perufed your friendly admonitions Ah, Eliza, a Secret monitor declares them too well founded % yet, tell me, undifeerning girl, how has the lovely Sydney erred to merit the blackening accufation ? I Sometimes read your
till I conclude him the wretch

you
58 TheTrinket.
you painted; but when I See him next, every injurious calumny flies his approach; that native franknefs, the manly elegance, the Sprightly wit, and thoSe harmonious accents, were they given but to conceal the abandoned profligate—-Fanny's maid knocks at the door j She informs me her miftreSs begs to Speak with me. Adieu—I attend the Summons*
^ •Sif	«
When I entered the apartment,. miSs Sydney was flanding with her back towards the door, apparently lofl: in thought She turned round, rouzed by my footfteps, and falling on my neck, burSfc into a flood of tears : I embraced her ; “ My Fanny, unfold your Sorrows, believe your grateful Emma would willingly part with hap pineSs to relieve them.’’
Ah, mifs Seaton, Said the Sweet girl, can you forgive the breach of
confi-

The TrinkeTc
59
confidence ? but fit down, continued She, and 1 will tell you all,”
I feated mySelf, and the dear afiliO:-^ ed ftill hanging on my neck, I ming led with her’s, the fympathizing tears of friendlliip. We were in this fitua-tion when Mr. Sydney entered the room ^ he darted, and the vivacity of unbounded pleafure changed indan-laneoufly into an expredion- of tendered concern ; “ Mifs Seaton ! ray Fan-ny! good God, ladies, what mean thefe forrows ?’" then throwing both his arms around us, petitioned us ta* unfold the caufc, that he might re-drefs or join in our afilidtion.. Already foftened, I was inexpredibly affected with his appearance,, and
head
funk on his fudaining bofom. Fanny difengaged herfelf, and left the room with precipitation. I was aShamed of my weaknefs, and- would have followed her, but he prevented, me.. ^ Tell me, my Emma, have, you a.
D 6
6o
The Trinket.
forrow your Sydney mull not Share What could 1 anSwer? in difcloling the real motive of my tears, I Sfiould have wronged my friend; for once then I had recourfe to artifice, and by alTuring him we wept for the misfortunes of a much loved young afifociate, removed fufpicion. I have not had a private conference with Fanny fince, but learnt fromdady Amelia the caufe of her concern : the defires I will ufe my intereft with her niece, and endeavour to engage her in a ready acquiescence to her commands. I ventured to argue with her ladyfhip, but in vain ; through what She termed excef-five weaknefs. She had fufiered her to refufe Several very advantageous proposals ; there could be no well founded objedion to Sir Theodofius Airy’s< perfon, his manners, or his underffand-ing-, and the Settlements he offered
O ^ \
highly exceeded her expedations. I would have anfwered, but She Saw my
in ten-
TheT rinket.
intentions, an#pointing to the door,. ** Mifs Seaton aare not to diSpute my will : leave me, and tell mifs Sydney Sir Theodolius is her hufband, or She has no longer an aunt.”—I obeyed the firll part of her inftrudfion j but did She fo little know your Emma, as ta imagine She could perSuade the lovely, the fenSible, the fentimental Sydney, to connect herfelf with a wretch, of
I
whole inferiority every hour would bring her fredr convidtion ?
This then was the caufe of my fweet friend’s concern : but was She not too deeply alilidled ? a girl of her fpirit! fo enterpriling, fo carelefs in danger. So firm in confcious redHtude a girl fo little moved with the pageantries of fortune, that I have knowit her, when furrounded with every plea-fure, ligh for the humble Shed, the-charms of peaceful obfcurity, and all the artlefs pleafures of the rural villager. If lady Amelia’s tyranny was
all

62
The Trinket.
all die had to fear,
breach of confidence
t
fued for pardon ?.
was
the;
which di
e-
I a o’clock.
I retired as foon as poflible from'
fupper to reaiTume my Amelia was by my
pen ; lady the whole evening; not a look efcaped her; die: was formal and unDfually audere: Fanny appeared deeply affedfed, thoughtful, and fpoke little:—I felt a con-draint I could not diffipate; and Mr. Sydney’s eyes were fixed on mine, as
I
if he feared I had not confefled the truth, and they could read the fecret f attempted to difguife. Sir Theodofi-us alone, was perfectly himfelf, and' finding Fanny rejedfed his civilities' with diSdain, turned the varying gallantry to lady Amelia, and'by fome lucky compliments, fixed her opinion of his merit, and drengthened her reions in his favour.—Heigh-ho t
Fli2^a9,

Ik	^
The T r I n k e t".
6t
Eliza, thus are our dreams of happl-nefs difpelled—Ah, let me' halfen to lofe in oblivion the mortifying reflection.—Goodnight, my friend r rnay
you fhare in pleafant vifions with
Your
E MJM A S E AT O N^,
LETTER XIL
Augustus Sydney, ESq. to Sir.
George Danvers.,
“' In thefe deep folitudes and awful cells,. Where heavenly penSive Contemplation dwells,. And ever muling Melancholy reigns,”
A
H, Lord I thofe trim damfels never dwell any where more to^ the purpofe, than in the refldence of tby once gay friend—Nov(% alas, how
the convivial laugh has long been a Aranger to my ears. A, thoufand, and a thoufand times, Dan*-
veis.
changed!
6 a.
The Trinket.
vers, have I been on the point of quitting my aunt, her habitation, and all my hopes of future fortune 5 when the idea of my dying father rulhes on my memory, and I make that facrihce to filial tendernefs, which all the united force of avarice and ambition never could have extorted : “ I know not my dear Auguftus, Said he, prefT-ing my hand, whether to regret the fmall inheritance my extravagance has left you ? myfelf early unac-cuffomed to controul, with all the means to gratify every youthful paf-
1 think I ought to rejoice that the temptations fo fatal to the father, are not his to bequeath to his fon ■ Your aunt, whofe tendernefs for you can only be equalled by her delire of fupporting the dignity of our family,, will ever look upoE> you as her child ; her kind alTurances of friendship, with the convidfion I entertain of your merit, are the Support of my laSl: mo-
lion
mcnts

r ■ V
The Trinket.
6?
mentsi do not refuSe to add all in your power to that conSolation, by promif-ing me to transfer all your afFe<fl:ion:
It IS
from me to her—and oh, my fon, continued he, if at any time your heart would revolt, at what you may efleem the misfortune of dependence, check its riling emotions, and reded: it was the lad; requed of a father who loved you tenderly.”,
Yes, it is that redediion which chains me to this folitude that fcene which prefents itfelf to my memory, and I endeavour to appear content——nay, chearful—would you believe it, Danversthe chearfulnefs of the gay Sydney is aflumed—ah, he would bludi if a real fprightlinefs were in Spired by the dull objects that furround him.—I never feem confei-oLis of my exidence but when I am chatting to Sevigny, or writing to you: I do not know though whether it is paying you any great compliment, for
I think


The Trinket.
I think they fay the neighbourhood here is particularly defirable : it may be fo, but when the Spirit—no faith fhe never had any—-but when the immortal part of my good old damfel has once taken its flightj I Shall readily fhew my Sentiments of it, by taking mine alSo to another paradife.
I die to return to thoSe Scenes of joyous revelry, which have So often exalted me above the common race of mortals—Hang it! I am too generous to find amuSement in the follies of the people here 5 and there is nothing elfe to extort a Smile.—-MiSerable fitua-tion, when narration muff Supply the place of Sentiment—a pun the wretched fubftitute of wit—and religion all that is proposed of future joy.
LET-

The Trinket.

LETTER XIII.
Seaton to Lady Eliza Beau-
CLERK.
'T'HE incloSed pacquet was deliver-
ed to me early this morning: my Eliza’s feeling heart will join to pity, the lovely Fanny.

** Encouraged by a look of affectionate friendQiip, I have feen the time when I would have difclofed every fecret of my heart to my dear Mifs Seaton ^ I would have thrown myfelf at her feet, and have obtained a pardon for the long concealment: but the confeffion was protracted by my brother’s entrance. Say, my Emma, will you fympathife with the unfortunate Fanny ? ah, rather will you not accufe her folly, and arraign as in-difcretion the fimplicity of youth?:
When
%
68
The Trinket.
When my brother firSt went to Oxford, lady Amelia removed with her family to one of her eliates a few miles from that place ^ to be flill near him, and to have many opportunities of feeing him while he purfued his fludies, afforded me infinite delight.—The allurements of novelty, and the enchanting beauties of the mofl rural fi-tuation, derived frefh charms from the confideration that he fhared its pleafures. Ah, Mils Seaton, fuffer me to dwell on the fcenes of delight, thofe Shades have witneffed j alas I I fuppofe you are acquainted with the narrative I am about to difclofe. Why, my Emma, can you not read your Fanny’s heart, and fave her the mortification of recollecting her va-niflied happinefs In the. days of his vacation, Auguftus would frequently accompany me in a rural ramble; and when he was from home, I took plea-fure in retracing the paths we had
trod
The Trinket.
69
trod together, while a favourite author was the companion of my walk. It was a moft delightful morning in April, the fun darted its enlivening rays ; the relenting earth difclofed its gay productions 5 the hyacinth, the primroSe, violet, and gay narciflus appeared in fweet profulion ;
s
“ The black bird whiftled from the thorny
brake.
The mellow bullfinch anfwered from the
grove

I had one of Shakefpeare’s tragedies in my hand, which fo totally engaged my attention, that I had flrayed far beyond my ufual walk, ere I difcovered my error; perhaps even then I might not have recollected it, but that I found myfelf unufually fatigued, and feeing a cottage at a fmall dillance, I determined to red: beneath its friendly fhed. A pretty boy, about five years old, was Handing in the yard, and undertook to fhew me to his grandmother.
/
r
T ms T R I N ic E T.
ther. I followed the prattling cherub to the nearefl room, and on his crying out he was their Billy, the door was opened. Heavens! what was my a-mazement, when I discovered an old woman, apparently in the jaws of death, fupported in the arms of a blooming and well dreft youth j his eyes humanely fixed upon her languid countenance, while two beauteous infants clung round the knees of their generous benefadfor. I remained mo-tionlefs, and hardly believing the reality of what I faw, when the charming unknown turned his eyes on me, and fiill fuftaining his feeble charge. It is thus, faid he, aflillance wears an angel’s form, and beauty borrows enchanting graces from benevolence.” I replied, that it was the noble error of elevated minds to conclude others aiSluated by their own rous motives; that an unexpedfed incident conducted me to the cottage
and
The Trinket.
7^
and I conSefTed myfelf indebted to the chance which had enabled me to relieve dillrefs, and exhibited humanity in its moSt beauteous form. I took a purfe from my pocket, and laying it upon the table, ‘‘ Good God ! I exclaimed, how thoughtlefs are thy creatures of afflictions their lituation exempts them from fuftaining.’*
We flaid fome time with the unfortunate family, and had the Satisfaction to behold our patient Somewhat recovered by our care. When I arofe to depart, the amiable youth begged I would permit him to Share my walk; I agreed without helitation, and we parted with infinite regret about a mile from my aunt’s. The next morning I arofe early, and by a kind of irreffll-ible attraction, bent my Heps towards the cottage : I had not proceeded far, ere I discovered the object that, un-" known to myfelf, I fought; he was Seated beneath a Spreading tree, and
had
• - ..
72
The Trinket.

had a book in his hand, which on fe ing me, he threw upon the grafs •, and ■ffepping forwards, approached me with a well turned compliment. I intreated him to refume the ffudy I had interrupted: he fmiled, and o-pening the page at one of Hammond’s Elegies, in a mofl charming voice repeated.
With mean difguiSe let others nature hide, And mimic virtue with the paint of art:
I Scorn the cheat Of reafon’s foolifh pride.
And boaft the graceful weaknefs of my heart,'

The more I think, the more I feel my pain. And learn the more each heavenly charm to
prize.
While fools, too light for pafllon, Safe remain. And dull fenfation keeps the ftupid wife.”
To change the fubjed’, I begged him to relate Some anecdotes of the unhappy family I furprifed him fo ge-neroufly relieving—he obeyed.
“ The
6
The Trinket.
73
The old woman yoir beheld me Supporting, is the mother of a favourite Servant I have lately lod ; in his laft illneSs he intreated to Speak with me, and falling at my feet, petitioned me to preferve an aged parent, and his three helplefs children, from the flings of want ; his labour had been long
their Sole Support,—-I afTured him, they fhould find in me an unalterable friend j he raifed his eyes to mine with a look of the warmeft gratitude 5 and falling back upon the bed, my ever honoured mafler, cried the faithful William, I dare believe you j”—and immediately expired. I Sent immediately to the wretched parent, acquaint itrg her with his deceafe, at the fame time deliring her to inform me of every wantl could Supply; and concluding the weight of obligations leffened by familiarity with the benefactor, I have made it my bufinefs frequently to vifit the little family. When I VoL., I.	E	uSually
74
The Trinket.
ufualJy approached the cottage, the children ran out to meet me, and hanging round me, difclofed their trifling wants, or made me umpire in an infant quarrel : but yefterday all was ffill. When I reached the door, the eldefl: boy opened the latch, and pointing to an inner room, burft into
tears.
William
feein?
o
me.
cryj your brother, your grandfather are they well ?”
He (hook his head, and conducing me to the bed-fide, gently undrew the curtain j the good old woman raifed herfelf in her bed, and “ Ah, fir, faid fhe, I Ihall Ihortly be beyond the reach of your humanity, but thefe helplefs children will live to celebrate their benefadtor. There are, I am told, charitable inftitutions for the maintainance of afHidted orphans your interefi: in the world may place them to advantage; but alas, fir! will not the charms of grandeur, and the varying joys of gaiety, drive from
your
\

The Trinket.
75
your youthful breall the wretched de-
pendants on your bounty?
I gave her the ftrongeSt alTurances that I would fhield them from op-preffion, that I would be the guardian of their youth, and provide for them Suitable to their birth.
“ Enough, fir, (he replied, I am content; and with the firmefi: confidence in the generous promife, I re-fign them to thy care.”
She embraced them Separately, strained the lovely girl to her maternal bofom, and raifing her eyes to heaven, Almighty God, the cried, fhel-ter this lovely blofifom from a Seducing world.”—She could proceed no further j the weeping child fell from her feeble grafp, and Ihe funk infenfible in my Sustaining arms. You, madam, were witnefs to the Sequel of the moving Scene; and I have the Satisfaction of informing you, her nurfe affures me there are still hopes of her recovery:
E 2
but
76
The Trinket.
but to what lucky chance am I indebt-
ed for the pleaSure I enjoy f Pardon,
madam, if the queffion is too daring ;
but can enquiry ceafe when it
IS
routed by beauty, and curiolity awak-
ened by the mod perfed: workman-
fhip of heaven ?—I told him the
charmsof the morning had induced me
to continue my walk beyond its uSual
length} that finding myfelf fatigued.
and discovering no other place of reff.
I ventured toenter the friendly cottage ;
that a lovely boy had conduded me
to the apartment where I found him,
like Some fuflaining angel, Softening
the bed of death.
Our topics of difcourfe were numer-
ous } and on every fubjed: he discover-
ed a lively wit, correded by a Solid
judgment, while the frankneSs of his
ingenuous youth received frelh graces
from the refinements of a liberal edu-
cuation. The hour that I was obliged
to attend in lady Amelia’s drefiing-
7
room
/

The Trinket.
77
room approached, and we feparated with an appointment to meet under the fame tree- in the evening. Ah, mifs Seaton, how happy was your Fanny, when each palling minute hastened the hour of meeting, and every revolving fun encreafed the growing friendlhip ! I foon learned the companion of my walks was the young marquis of Montreal, eldeft fon
——that he had been
to the duke of ——— fome time at the univerfity, was much beloved, and continued at Oxford but till the duke had provided a tutor to accompany him in his travels. As lady Amelia was generally engaged in her apartment, and I had always been ufed to amufe myfelf in the garden with a book, or my guittar, it was very eafy to avoid fufpicion ; and I did not difclofe our frequent meetings, as I feared to hazard the inexpreffible plea-fure I received in his fociety. I often indulged myfelf in listening to my
E

bro-
yS
The Trinket.
brother’s defcription of the fludent^s peculiarities, or to the encomiums he lavished on his friends. When the marquis was mentioned, he didjuflice to his worth •, but as he was not in the number of his more intimate alToci-ates, he was feldom the fubje(ft of his difcourfe. Confcious how inconceivably dear I efteemed the amiable youth, a certain unaccountable diffidence kept me lilent, and to my own heart only I dared recount his worth. Some weeks were now elapfed, and the dear marquis was become
I
“ My conllant thought.
Like light, the daily blelKng of my eyes. And the dear dream of all my fwceteft
flumbers.

He was the charming vilion of each returning night, and I arofe but to renew the joys of yefterday.
One morning, at breakfast, lady Amelia propofed an expedition for a
few
\
The Trinket.
79
few days to Bath : as I had never Seen that much celebrated city, Auguftus joyfully embraced the offer. With her ladylhip, to berefolved, is immediately to execute: it would have been fruitlefs to have framed excufes, and I left the Grove without a poffibi-lity of informing the marquis. We fhared every pleafure of this gay metropolis : the men exerted their wit in complimenting my charms, and their addrefs in varying my amufements: but the marquis was ever prefent to my imagination, and with infinite delight I beheld the morning dawn that was to reftore me to his fociety. It was late before we reached the Grove: I threw myfelf upon the bed, and anticipating the joys of meeting, I fell into a profound fleep j I had left the Ihutters open, and the rifing fun, darting through the curtain awakened me. I arofe, and contemplating the beauteous object, “ Tell me, thou glorious
E 4	orb.
8o
The Trinket.
4
orb, cried I, doll thou, , in thy wid extended courfe, behold an objedl love

]y as my Montreal ?”—It was too early to leave the houfe, and aiming at a Hudied negligence of drefs, I endeavoured to beguile the tedious minutes at my toilet: at length, my watch informed me it was the ufual hour, and I fallied forth.-—Alas! my gaiety for-fook me w^hen I reached the tree, and faw no traces of my marquis j I feated myfelf upon the block of wood where I beheld him the morning after our firfl meeting, and gave a loofe to tears, I was loft in thought, my handkerchief at my eyes, when I felt my apron gently pulled, and looking up, I faw one of the little cottagers at my fide: he drew a letter from his pocket, and telling me that his grandmother fent me that, ran from me with amazing fwiftnefs. It was folded up, and fealed as a Small pacquet, but without
addrefs, and I opened it with a tremb-
ling
The Trinket.
8i
ling Hand; ah, mifs Seaton ! no time can erafe the dear contents from my remembrance, and the following lines are flrongfy engraven on my heart:
“ Was it well done, mifs Sydney, to leave the wretched Montreal a prey to the moft racking inquietude ? to quit him without one foft adieu ! Ah, madam, pardon the ill-founded accu-fations of a diflraded heart j I know* the neceflity which compelled you to partake the fatal journey, and to avoid a final feparation, you have ignorantly incurred it. The day after you left the Grove I received the duke's commands, his fiern injundfions, that, with the tutor he had provided, I muft leave England on the morrow. Alas! mifs Sydney, malice blackened our delightful meetings, and bore the aggravated mifchief to his ear. 1 received the mandate with inconceivable. an-guilh i but it was a father’s writing.
Ei
and
82
The T r I n k e t.
and claimed obedience. Is this a time, madam, to difclofe the moft ardent love ? a paflion, firft conceived beneath the roof of forrow, and avowed in the moment of reparation : yet, hear me, all*confcious heaven, while in thy light I Swear thefe arms lhall not receive another bride 5 and may this heart no longer beat, when it ceafes to forget its firft polTelTor. Adieu, my only love—thou pleafing partner of my happiell hours, believe I tafte lincerer tranSport in vowing to be only thine, than the moft Seducing of thy Sex could offer.—Thy image Ihall be the dear inhabitant of my bo-fom—thy charms a Sure preservative againft the Snares of beauty—and the remembrance of thy matchlefs virtues a Spur to glorious deeds. Shall I entreat you to preServe your heart for me ? Shall I declare So tenderly I love you, the bare idea that another may triumph in your affection, is worSe
than
The Trinket.
than death felfiHi thought
Ah, no ! I fcorn the Mifs Sydney may be bleffed—and if you meet a man more worthy,, raife the deferving youth to tnvied happinefs, by the mofl invalu^
able gift, thy yielded hand. Ere you receive this, one air no longer fur-rounds us both 5 we can no longer gaze on the fame flowering flirub. Still 1 envy the unconfcioiis plant thy lovely glances: and yet, delightful thought! the fame glorious orb enlivens both: tell me, mifs Sydney, how many of thofe revolving funs fhall pafs, ere you entirely forget your Gonftant
Montreal.’’
A thoufand times I perufed the tender billet, then falling on my knees, vowed never to receive a hufband but my Montreal. In returning to the houfe, I met my brother with my
E 6
lord
\
lord G
TheTrinket.
j a nobleman who at Bath made me profeffions of love, which I conifrued meer idle gallantry. I endeavoured to avoid them, but Auguf-
me by the gown, and obliging me to liffen to a little fprightly raillery on being So early abfent from the houSe, conducted me to the drefling-room, where break-
tus
caught
/
Soon after the table was ----------took occaflon
removed, lord G-------
. to leave us.
I faw by Sydney’s' eyes he had Something particular to communicate •, nor w^as furpriSed, when he informed me that his lordfliip had Solicited him to ufe the interefl: he pofTefled, in his favour. “ My dear girl, continued the friendly adviSer, you can have no
objedion to lord G—------’s perfon or
accomplifliments, and his charader is univerfally approved. Lady Amelia is capricious j and though in compli-. ment to your brother’s peace you have
avoided
/
TheTrinket.
t
avoided that Subjects yet your filence has convinced him how much you feel the weight of her authority. Say, can my Fanny hefitate in accepting a pro-mifing eftablilhment, and in fharing the bleffings of independence with the' mod amiable of his fex ?”
Ah, my brother!' your Fanny was born the fpo.rt of fortune ; nor receives the pleafure from the flattering pro-pofal, but that She may prove her con-ffancy in rejecting it. Yes, dearefl: Montreal, cried I, (riling with agitation) love can pleafe but from thy-lips, and never will 1 liSben to thy rival.—I made this tender brother the confidant of every fecret of my foul t. he kindly embraced me as I concluded the artlefs narrative, and gently chid me for fuffering my heart to be engaged, at the fame time alTured me he never would controul my inclinations^, but as I could not continue long without predendecs to my favour, it fhould
be
/
86
The Trinket.
be his study to lighten the persecu-
tion
Lord G
left us the next
morning, and to Sydney am I indebt-ed, that I was not obliged to listen to the profestions of his pastion. It is now, Emma, nearly three years fince last I faw the marquis, nor have I ever heard from him : ah, my friend ! was then his pastion feigned ? or does he no longer love ? It is true, stnce he left England we have changed our habitation—but my brother has been frequently at the Groves and I am informed the cottagers yearly receive their accustomed falary from his bounty: could he not convey a letter by them? his banker—the duke—or Some com-mistioned friend, perhaps remits the
Ah ! how ready are we to excufe the man we love. Now, my Emma, you are indeed my friend ; {killed in every weaknefs of your Fanny’s heart, you will pity, you
will adviSe her. Tell me, mifs Sea-
V
ton.
regular allowance.

. w V .
T H E T R I N K E T. 87
ton, how fhall I avoid the odious pro-feffions my aunt commands me to encourage j how prevent a rupture between her ladyShip and my brother ? I know his generous indignation will be rouSed againd: the wretch, Ihould he dare to perfid: in his addredes, and I tremble for the confequences. Dear Emma, had I never feen the marquis. Sir Theodofius had dill been my aver-fion 3 though all ambition adcs, were his to offer, I would rejeO: the gift. Ah, did you know the marquis, you would acknowledge his love an ample recompenfe for all I yield to prove my title to that inedimable bleding. Yes, lovely Montreal, your Fanny never can forfake you, dill, dill my heart acknowledges thy merit 3 and only when I forget myfelf can I ceafe to remember thee.
Mifs
The Trinket,
Mifs Seaton in continuation.
I
Say, my Eliza, why thefe “ lawlefs libertines” are fullered with impunity to betray our honefl confidence, and triumph over the forrows which fpring from a too ready trufi: in them. Conflancy and truth are antediluvian virtues,, our anceflors indeed might think very ornamental, but which their more enlightened pofterity have exploded, as trammels too narrow to-confine the towering genius of a po-
:	** but, Emma,
lifhed Maccaroni: what is all this to the marquis ? Believe, my friend, I hope the fubjeil bears no affinity to him; but that in nearly three years abfence, he ffiould not have found an opportunity of af-furing his ** ortly love that her image
was fiill the dear inhabitant of his bo-
%
fom” is a paradox, and the folution exceeds the capacity of your
Emma.
The Trinket*
89
LETTER XIV.
Augustus Sydney, Efq. to Sir
George DanveRxS.
A»* I was perfuaded a fellow of my
genius could not exifl; long without avanture—if any thing in this dreary corner of the creation could excite my vanity, it mull be rouzed here : but no—where none admire, ’tis ufelefs to excel as bad as none however, women and villagers. Take the tale then, that it may not fink in« tirely in oblivion. , I introduced you to Charlotte Darcy—that (he admired me, you who know me-«-muft know alfo was a thing of courfe. It Seems Some artful fellow, witnefs of her at-> tachment, determined to take advantage of it, and thought fit juft to put
my name at the bottom of Some very
amorous
/
90

HE Trinket
v»
amorous epiftles; intreating however a trip to Scotland, as the fatigue of fettlements were his abomination then the eclat of a private marriage, and the joyous aftonilhment of her father and my aunt, ha! ha ! ha ! it carried the face of generofity, nor to wifh to tye old Darcy down to fortune ; and the deluded fair, who has more vanity than prudence, eafily a-greed that the detection of a private meeting would be the utter ruin of the affair—the time,^ the place was fixed on—that I did not make my appearance was eafily accounted for—fet out a few hours before, to order relays of horfes, and prepare the clergyman, the ring, &c.—Fortunately, however, a fellow to whom the hero, elevated by liquor and fuccefs, had the night before boafted his plan, out of compaf-fion for the Darcys, gave me fome intimation of it—and as one would not,
you
The Trinket.
91
T
you know, let a poor girl Suffer So Severely by one’s attradlions, I Sat off in immediate purSuit of them; and, luckily for MiSs Darcy, arrived juft as they entered the church. Concluding me come to plight my faith to her, fhe flew into my arms and fainted.—I was really affe<Sted by her fttuation, and lincerely wiftied the amiable Finch-
ft
ley had the taSIc before her of breaking the ftate of the affair to her Char-lotte—Before ftie recovered, the fellow went down on his knees to me, intreating my forgiveneSs, which I promised him, provided he informed MiSs Darcy of his villainy as Soon as fhe was Sufficiently recovered to Support it.—-Finding her returning to life, I retired to another part of the church, while the detected hero made his humble confeffion. — Figure to yourSelf her emotions when I went up to her, and taking her hand, “ MiSs Darcy, Said I, though the most determined
partia-
92
The Trinket.
partiality for a Single life, renders your obliging preference of no Service to me as ahufband, -—I hope you will not refuSe to accept my fincere friend-
ship
think that you have found a
brother really interehed in your welfare, and put yourfelf under the pro-tedlion of a man who will be happy to rellore you to your family and con-
nections in Safety.

Ah, Sir, Said
fhe, mull not you, muSt not the world deSpiSe a girl, whoSe blind fondneSs has hurried her into So precipitate. So undutiful an aCtion.—-I am indeed Severely punished ; but your generoSity has overwhelmed me with gratitude and leaves me Scarce any thing to regret, but that an adequate return
will never be in
my power
Mv
prayers and my bleffing however Sliall be yours 5 and if their fincerity can Secure acceffion, your merit will indeed meet its reward.”—Heigh-ho !—Lm vapoured to death with this humdrum
The Trinket.
93
drum—Suffice it, I contrived to hulh the affair pretty well, and the Darcys are once more at peace—adore me to be Sure—but that’s nothing new——the old .man I believe would give me any thing I Should alk Sor—-and the Spin-Slers here—proteft themSelves charmed with me. Sometimes' they take occalion to expatiate on MiSs Darcy’s
beauty
her accomplilhments, her
large Sortune—devil take them all is there any thing on earth to compensate the loSs oS liberty—not a hundred Darcys, no, iS ever the blind god does wound me—-So Severely as to make me renounce that deareft bleS-hng oS the human mind, it muli be Something more than beauty, accomplishments, or fortune—it muff: be a Jonl—Fortune—I hate the name—let the battered rake who has Survived every generous Sentiment and SenSation the wrinkled Smnfter: wed for for-
4r’
tune—let them try if it will purchaSe
that
94
The Trinket.
that mutual elegance of tendernefs, which can alone fupport the finking heart.
LETTER XV.
Mifs Seaton to Lady Eliza
Beauclerk.
"O^E met in the breakfaft room earlier than uSual this morning, and were fhortly after joined by Mr. Sydney ; he was in his riding drefs, booted and Spurred, and Seemed in higher Spirits than 1 had Seen him for Some days paft. ASter drinking a dilli of chocolate he rang the bell, and his
man
bring
appearing, the horSes
4C

James (Said he) then turning to
lady Amelia, informed her he proposed quitting her for a few days. She bowed afSent—I read in Fanny’s eyes her defire to learn his route; but fhe
pru-
T r E Trinket.
95
prudently reftralned enquiry-—was it then for me to betray folicitudeyet I ardently wilhed SirTheodolius would atone his former impertinence by obtaining the wilhed-for fecret.—But no—the wretch was filent, and Sydney rofe to depart without fatisfying the curiofity he had raifed. He fa-luted lady Amelia, and embraced his filler.—Alas ! what meant my throbbing brealf, the moment he approached me : happily his own confufion was little lefs, and prevented his ob-ferving mine. We followed him to
the door
you
my
cannot imagine, Beauclerk, a finer figure on horfeback, fo noble, fo inconceivably graceful. When almofl out of fight he turned round, and looking back, waved his handkerchief. Shall I confefs all my folly—fhall I tell you that I wept this place appeared at that inffant a defart, and I envied the very birds that wantoned round him. Fanny and
your
o6
The Trinket.
your friend are now inseparable ; fhe indulges herfelf in talking of the marquis, and every event in which Sydney was concerned has, charms for me. Sometimes we amufe ourSelves with conjedtures on his journey ; ** a thing So unufual, fays his filler, to leave us for days, nor make me the confidante of his defigns; to leave me expofed to this coxcomb’s impertinence, and to lady Amelia’s increafing unkindneSs” Sometimes we conclude he obeys the call of friendship. Sir Harry Edgerton, or his Danvers, might didfate the hur-rying Summons—but Fanny Seems naore apprehenfive a “ lady’s in the cafe(he informs me here lies her
f
brother’s failing; constantly fuccefs-ful in his attempts upon the fair, he has learnt to confider women mere
Th
us we
objects of amufement. cheat the tedious hours till his return, and Sir Theodofius now imagining himfelf of importance, is, from the
confe-
The Trinket.
97
consequential airs he allumes, exceedingly diverting. Let me tell you, Eliza, if Mifs Sydney continues long obdurate, I have hopes, by a little well-timed 'flattery, to drive her from his heart 5 a few tender glances, and B “ gad fo, Mifs Seaton you are too fmart, too fmart upon my word madam”—have kindled thefe daring expectations. Lady Airy’s compliments
•lady Airy’s carriage^—ah, the enchanting founds.-—The hero knocks at my door; dear Sir Theodoflus, I fly to admit you
Pfliaw, how can you be fo teiz-ing”—to lay down my pen, merely to be informed the fun (hone
4^
intolerable impertinence—why,wretch,I fee, I feel its rays. What think you, Eliza, he has pjApared an arbour for my reception, and I mufl: toil for half a mile beneath the Scorching luminary, or forfeit all pretenfions to his favour ; J go then, left on my refufal, poor
VoL. I

F
Mils
q8
T H t Trinket.
Mils Sydney fliould be obliged to ac company him.
Ha f ha ! ha ! excellent upon my word, why thou monkey, art thou not contented with making thyfelS ridiculous, but the very Scheme of nature mud be altered in compliance with
heterogeneous imagination
?
Was
there ever any thing more laughable ! an arbour formed by the branches of thickly interwoven elms, the prettieil: in nature, this creature had been all the morning bufied in adorning with the variegated produce of the garden. Do but imagine'a fun-flower, a carnation, a jonquil, or a lily, Sprouting from an elm—and over the entrance pair of bleeding hearts, with the initials of his and ray friend’s name curioully wrought in a cypher of rcSe

buds,
while a thoufand clumSy cu-
pids and fluttering doves, frefli from the toy-fliop, completed the ridiculous
TliE Trinket.
99
lous appearance. I burll Into fo hear-
ty a laugh, that I was Some Ume, ere
I discovered MiSs Sydney Seated at the
head of the arbour, and Sir Theodo
. iius placing me by her fide, cad: him-
felf upon the grabs at our feet.
Hea-
ven knows how long we fliould have
continued in this very amufing litua-
tion, had not a rofe-bud which form-
ed one of the bleeding hearts, luckily
fell to the ground.
Sir Theodofius
darted up to replace it, but being un-
able to reach the Spot which the un-
fortunate dower was dedined to pol
fefs, fetched from a neighbouring tree
the-jfiool that had aflided him in his
notable improvements ; then placing
it jud on the bank, rofe with amazing
agility, and was congratulating him-
felf on his adonidiing tade ; when.
ah, unlucky chance! dooping rather
too forward, the treacherous dool flew
from under him, and poor Sir Thco-
dolius rolled into the brook.—*Fanny
F 2
Screamed,





iT—_

100
The Trinket.
fcreamed, laughed, and endeavoured to affift the degraded knight by turns. Mv mirth was exceffive, and echo
j	^
rang with the repeated peals of laughter—;the gardeners, alarmed by Mifs
r
Sydney’s cries, flew towards the place whence they thought they proceeded, and as the cave of Trophonius immediately inclined all who entered it to melancholy, this arbour feemed invented to reflore their native chearful-nefs, and had the quite contrary effedt of exciting exuberant mirth — the gardeners, the maids, the coachman, through excefllve laughter were unable to offer their affiflance; and we
r
ajl furrounded the brook, holding our fides, and gazing firSf upon the arbour, then on the unfortunate knight, who by his repeated cries, and moving lamentations heightened the Scene happily the brook was fo Shallow it was more than probable his doaths would be the only Sufferers j and I
queflion

The Trinket.
lot
quellion whether any had ftirred to relieve him, but that the found of lady Amelia’s voice rouSed her fervants, and fhe reached us juft as the drip« ping hero had landed on the bank. Her ladyfhip appeared amazingly a-larmed at the accident, and Sir Theo-
dofius was conducted in ftate to the
\
inanlion, cafting many enraged glances at the unfortunate damfels, and,I doubt not, vowing vengeance againft us in his heart. He retired to his apartment foon after—lady Amelia Seems to feel her favourite’s difgrace,
Fanny and myfelf are obliged to af fume a gravity we are ftrangers to. How infinitely would Me Sydney have been charmed with this adventure 1 ah,, does he while abfent,; think of
while
Emm a-.
r 3
LET-
102
The Trinket
LETTER XVI.
From the fame to che fame.
Y Eliza we are all undone—that fatal arbotir, what mifchief was it big v^ith—lady Amelia was clofet-ed this morning for an hour with Sir Theodofius, and went from thence
s
to Mifs Sydney’s apartment, where flie gave vent to her rage, and loaded the dear girl with variety of opprobrious language 5 ** did file indulge her in everv wi(h fhe formed, that her au-thority might be defpifed—and fup-port Mifs Seaton—but to ridicule a
favourite gue(I.”~The poor girl was unable to anfwer her ; and fhe left her with a menace that if Rie did not prepare on the morrow to receive Sir Theodolius as her hufband, neither herfelf nor beggared friend fliould find an afylum within her walls—now could I laugh very heartily at the impotent
/
m
1 H E
Trinket.
103
potent rage, but that my Fanny •fulFers; and I cannot perfuade the dear afflided that Mr. Sydney is her protection from the threatened violence. She fends to fpeak with me—I will refume my pen as foon as poITible,
*

*

Joy, joy, my Eliza—read the in-clofed, and join in admiring the nb-. the moll valuable of men.
To Mifs Sydney.
Shew me the way in which I can oblige you, Sydney, and let the pleafure with I embrace the opportunity evince the fincerity of my friend-
fhip.

Thefe were my Fanny's words
upon a late occalion, and the time is now arrived, when I will make trial of her affection : on mature deliberation, the only way I can in Sure you from lady Amelia’s tyranny, is by entreating your acceptance of the inclofed deed,
F 4	which.
104
The Trinket.
whi cb, by fixing you in independence renders you millrefs of your actions. I hope to embrace you in a few days; my dear fiber, do, not fubjeCt your Augufius to the mortification of bearing his Fanny confefs herfelf obliged. I arn jufi preparing for a mafked ball ^ you would laugh to See me eti philo-fophet 5ind point your Sprightly wit at a Ilranger metamorphofe than any Ovid has celebrated—I know not how
you
feel
; but believe me you are infinitely indebted to me for bellowing thofe precious moments, borrowed irom the theatre of gaiety, upon that unfafiiionable thing-—a filler | and it will be fome time ere I dare fhake hands with a bel efprit^ or addrefs a well turned compliment to a pretty woman, after having fubScribed myfelf
Your truly afifedionate
Sydney.
In
\
The Trinket.
1.05


*


In this pacquet was inclofed a deed of fettlement, entitling miSs Sydney to* three hundred pounds per annum, in--cluding a dwelling lioufe in a pleaSant part of Somerfetihire.—Thus has this generous brother, out of his fmall pa^-trimony, rendered a much-loved lifter independent; and now, unawed by lady Amelia’s threats. She may pre-ferve her hand for the amiable Mon--treal: her happineSs could be efta-bliftied in no other method; to have received an annual allowance from> Mr. Sydney would have fubjected her' to many mortifications 5, and it is im— pofiible to.confer frequent.obligations, without reminding us that we are dependent. The dear girl is all amazement,, and, loft in admiration, weeps^ the unexpected gift.. I am impatient, to learn how lady Amelia will receive: the news, but from her happy par-
5
- I
io6
The Trinket.
tiality in favour of her nephew’s actions, I have the moll flattering expectations. And now, my Eliza, are you not delighted with the noble youth ?
I
Dear, generous Sydney ! the modelly that fcruples to confefs itfelf charmed with thy worth, differs little from in-fenfibility.
*




Since I wrote the above, I learn, that after pefufing her brother’s pac-quet. Mil's Sydney informed her aunt of the contents; and befeeching her permiffion to difcard Sir Theodolius, affured her (he fhould ever find her as fond, as dutiful, as obedient, as while her foie dependence was on her bounty. Lady Amelia was charmed with this inffance of her affedion, and did juf-tice to her nephew’s generofity. Sir Theodofius leaves us to-morrow; and through the amiable Sydney, felicity is once more reffored to this little circle.
\
T HE Trinket.
107
cle.—Write Soon, my friend, and by affurances you (hare, complete, our happineSs.

LETTER XVII.
Sir Harry Edgerton to Augustus Sydney, Efq.
/
Madrid.
Augudus, were thofe unmerited praifes lavilhed on your Edgerton.? believe me they are acceptable, but as they prove your partiality, and convince me you poITefs thefe virtues with which you grace your friend. I have beer) here three weeks, and you would hardly acknowledge your Edgerton in the furly Spaniard : it is my cuflom to adopt the manners of the people I converfe with ; their ideas are not perhaps fo ealily affurned, and in eafes where to dilTent from the ge-
F 6
neral
io8
The Trinket.
/
Hcral opinion can be no imputation on
my understanding, I neither affedl
stngularity nor endeavour to avoid it.
Ere I return to England, I propoSe Spending a few days at Paris : in that tlicatre of frolic, whim, and bagatelle, I stiall give a loofe to the innocent pleafures that furround me, and temper the morofenefs of philofophy with the airy fprightlinefs of the thoughtlefs Parilian.
Sir Richard Steele has termed gallantry to women the heroic virtue of private perfons : in France, the ladies reign with unlimited fway 5 but we know not where to Seek the glorious deeds their flaves have perfeisted, nor is the general gallantry produdfive of general virtue—-flop, Sydney—I know what you would instnuate—Unlimited profestions are Seldom the test of lin-
centy
and the univerSal lover never
ifes to that dignity of Sentiment the
6
fervent
The Trinket.
rou>
fervent attachment to a virtuous individual infpires.—In England, where we laugh at the fetters impofed by beauty, and ridicule the paffion till we feel its fweeteft excefs, the nobleSl: actions Ipring from the ambition of meriting the fair 5 and I will engage one tender glance from a Britilh youth is attended with more elevated resolutions than the fmooth adulation of thefe boundlefs profelTors.
I had the unexpeded happinefs of meeting with our friend Harry Law-fon at SaragoITa, engaged as ufual in> the full purfuit of Some dying fair one: • furprize enhanced the joy of our accidental rencontrei and in gaitjde cceurr he fwore he would have the pleafure of Spending Some days with his old af-fociate. Whether he did not find the-conversation of one, to whom years hadi given gravity, as agreeable as he expected j or that his fair Atalanta, ap-^ pearing in his dream, redoubled his.
keennefs
MO
The Trinket.
keenneSs for the chace, I am at a lofs to
' /
determine ; but this excentric genius, while I was folded in the arms of fleep, ordered his horfes, and fet off with redoubled fpirits in his irregular purfuit. How happy is this madrhan, while, like the farnous hero of La Manche, his Quixotifm enlivens the hours of an otherwife inhpidexiftence, and conduces to the entertainment of the furrrounding fpedtators. If you-have an inclination for a trip to Paris, I will meet you there what time you fhall appoint, and accompany you in your return to England, What fay you Sydney, has this fcheme no charms for you Believe your prefence would enliven every fcene,. and be infinitely
agreeable to
Your
PIenry Edgerton.
LET-
The Trinket.
Hi
LETTER XVIII.
Augustus Sydney, Efq. to Sir
George Danvers.
A! ha! ha! blufh on, virago, and believe
my
the
little
pretty
rage by adding variety to thy beauty
has rendered it more alluring.
Really
9
Danvers, thefe bewitching females were created but to involve thy Sydney in the moft confounded ferapes ^ but let me endeavour to give you a clearer account of this important fracas.—Know then, that on my arrival this evening, after fhaking hands with Fanny and lady Amelia, I enquired for miSs Seaton, and was informed She had been Some time in the grove j I followed, but not feeing her, concluded She had retired into a grotto : nor was I midaken in my conjedlures I entered unobferved, and flood
7
motionlefs
$
«(**«
112
The Trinket
motionlefs, contemplating the Beautiful objedl I had ever beheld, the blooming Seaton in a becoming negligence of drefs, and reclined in the mod inviting attitude.—At length the raifed her eyes, and darting from her feat with precipitation—“ Good hea vens! Ihe exclaimed, do b then once more behold my amiable Sydney ?”■ and approaching towards me, “ this unexpeided pleafure, fir”—Ihe bludi-ed, helitated, and was incapable of proceeding. I caught her to my bofomj and warmed with wine and beauty in Ihort, George, fo little was I mader of myfelf, that I dared to Shock my fider’s friend with the mod infamous propofals—As if She had borrowed drength from difdain,. the lovely heroine burd from my encircling arms r « Wretch, cried Ihe, were the world: at thy difpofal, I would fcorn to Ihare it with thee. — Ah, Mr. Sydney, f blulh to have been fo much deceived;’*
'Av;
•V
W
The Trinket.
I
At that inftant, George “ I felt how awful virtue is,”^—nor offered to detain her. Not doubting, however, but that the dear girl, after a little pouting, would be as ready as myfelf for a reconciliation, I waited%ith impatience the hour of fupper ; but a melfage, informing lady Amelia that miSs Seaton was indifpofed and begged to be excufed appearing, was all the fatisfaction it brought:—the ladies were extremely concerned, but, thanks to my fkill in the difeafe, my fpirits were little impaired by an indifpoSition I concluded a few hours would remove, and I entertained them with a
I
ridiculous reprefentation of the party I dined in ; at laSt wc feparated, and not inclined to reft, I feized my pen, the mod: eligible method to promote
** tired nature’s Sweet reSlorer, balmy fleep.”
Curffe
114
The R I N K E T.
^ ^ ^ ^
\
Curfe on the ill-timed folly that has
dehroyed my happinefs.—She is gone, Danvers j absolutely eloped imagine us Seated at, breakfaSf, open mouthed, gazing on each other in ffupid amazement, as if planet ftruck at the unex-pedfed news, while miSs,Seaton’s favourite attendant delivered a letter to my Sifter, and informed us that her lady ordered a chaife laft night, and urging indifpenlibly bufinefs. Set off in the morning before fun-rife. —Several of the Servants had followed the girl into the room, either to divert themfelves with our Surprize, or to gain intelligence on the ftrange occurrence : lady Amelia obferved them,, and turning to Fanny, “ My dear. Said fhe, the bufinefs that claimed mifs. Seaton’s attendance demands imme-diate difpatch ; and, as the moment
we fay Farewell is the moft painful
p a r t
The Trinket.
115
part of Separation, I would not Suffer
her to embrace you.’*
You would have laughed, George, could you have beheld the altered looks of the Surrounding Spectators j lately So intent to catch every word, to
treaSure
look:
the flare of
every
wonder on their vacant countenances inflantly gave place to disappointment; and by lady Amelia’s lucky preSence of mind, the dear Emma’s SpotleSs name was preServed from their degrading Suspicions. When we were alone, her ladyfhip confeffed herfelf ignorant of her departure, and gave free latitude to female eloquence, while the utmofl variety of imaginary cauSes were afhgned, as the motives of her Secrecy and flight. I endeavoured to filence her, but fhe proceeded with encreafing virulence, nor Scrupled to load the charmer with the mofl Scandalous afperSions:— “ Good God, ray dear madam, cried the afflidled Fanny,
reflraia
116
The Trinket
reftrain thefe ill-grounded accula»' tions } I’ll engage Mifs Seaton is innocent, and will return to us with power
J
to account for all her a<£fions-
79
€€
Re-
turn ! cried lady Amelia, almoft choak-ed with rage, never fhall thefe doors receive her j and the perfon who dares aflift her, no longer boafts my fa-
vour.
99
Diftradled with a thoufand contending paffions, I threw myfelf at her feet, befeeching her to recall the cruel Sentence j while the too rigid beauty prefented herfelf to my imagination, afflicted, unprotected, and vainly call-ing upon Sydney.-—Fanny drew the letter from her pocket, and having a-gain perufed it, put it in my hand ; I withdrew to indulge myfelf in private, and hurrying to a retired part of the garden, preffed the dear characters to my lips.—Here I expected to fee the caufe of her elopement drawn in the most odious colours, and doubt-

The Trinket.
117
€d not but the rage of an exalperatcd woman would have fpent itSelf in complainings to her friend—^fee how I wronged my Emma’s elevated mind.
Mifs Seaton to MiSs Fanny Syd-
ney.
A fatal neceffity compels me to quit your hospitable manlion.—Ah, Mifs Sydney, believe not appearances j nor think your Emma inSenlible of the generous friendship which has long fup-ported her. That I am obliged to leave you without difcloling the motives that enforce the feeming ingratitude adds poignancy to misfortune : my much loved Fanny, why, why am I not permitted to clafp you to my bofom j to make you the confidante of my bleeding heart !—Alas! I thought the forrows your fweet fociety relieved, the lad: I had to Suffer ^ and when I refigned my father, foolilhly concluded





^_ ^. —-• -

118
The Trinket.
eluded the arrows of adverlity exhaufl-ed. My generous friend, I leave you with heart*felt anguiUi.—-Ah, how imperfedl is the virtue that has not learnt to deny itfelf, and how impotent the affedion that is not covetous of the calamity which imparted would wound its friend.—-Should fcandal,
t
roufed by my Sudden departure, point its envenomed (hafts againft my fpot-iefs - reputation, I truil MiSs Sydney will defend it : (lie too, will Soften la-dy Amelia in my favour, and fliould we ever meet again, I flatter my Self (he will not blufh to acknowledge her
unfortunate, but faithful ,
Emma.
moving
f
Ah, Danvers, over this Sweetly
billet, even floicifm mull drop a tear—that I was the inflidor of her heart-felt anguifh,” was a refledion I was unable to Support.
Yet
The Trinket
iig
Yet tell me, George, was not the virtue too Severe that urged her flight? might not even the mofl: rigid, have been contented with a iefs painful Sacrifice ?
I ordered my horSe—and forbid-ding my Servant to follow me, have traced her over moorlands and
j y
from tovv^n to town.
mountains Oh, I was not born to purSuC—never Shone So little—and happily as I am not an adept in the Sport, I have little occaSion to engage in it-—you understand me, Danvers,
“ In love the viclors from the vanquifli’d £y. 'They fly tiiat wound.”
♦
To be Sure at preSent things are Some-
but I was juft going to tell you, that all the advantage I have reaped from this notable purSuit# amounts to no more, than the mere Sulpicion that the pretty novice has
Sought privacy in London 5 at leaSi the
land-
what derangee
/

X
i20
The Trinket.
landlord at M—• informed me, that a young woman exadly reSembling the description, had taken a place in a flage coach going to that metropolis.
It is impollible for me to leave this now truly defolated manfion •, the women here, might conclude me concerned in Emma’s departure, and Scandal once awakened, exaggerate the truth—I Iliall he douhly impatient till this unfortunate affair is quietly adjulled ; and the moment fhe is beyond the reach of afperfion, ufe my utmoft endeavours to difcover her re-
a
treat. In the mean time, you may be of infinite Service to me—be diligent, my dear Danvers, in trying to find the lovely wanderer—fhe is moll certainly in London ; ah, let me conjure you to frequent every place where it is likely you fhould receive information : if you prove fuccefsful, place her in Some genteel family, tell her how ardently I love, and allure her I Shall efleem
myfelf
The Trinket.
I2t
rnySelS the happieSh of mankind, if ■fhe will condefcend to accept my hand, the only adequate atonement for the injury She has fuftained. So ! fo-1 on my word a generous reparation ? who would not be affronted, to be So ap-peafed. Well, it mull be confeffed, there is fomething extremely ennobling in the ardors of a virtuous paf-iion j it refines the heart, polishes the fehtiments — can even confer new graces on
Augustus Sydney.
LETTER XVm.
Sir George Danvers to Augustus
Sydney, Efq,
‘‘ Of all comforts I mlfcarried.
When I play’d the fool and married.”
^ HIS matrimony, Sydney, is the
devil! an abfolute ignis fatuus to delude the
VoL. L
unwary
G
a vmon in
pro-
122
The Trinket.
proSped pleaSant, but ending in def-
pair
an
enchanting phantom that
promises everlalling joys, and vanishes in the embrace.—Socrates evinced his fortitude in fuftaining it, and the wits of all ages have proved their genius in ridiculing it. It furniShes raillery for the gay, enquiry for the curious, and disappointment for the Sanguine j it inflrudts the philoSopher to moralize, the divine to harangue on the empti-neSs of Sublunary pleafure, and the beauty to negledt her charms. It is now nearly three weeks, Since I engaged for better, for worSe C’ and you are, doubtleSs, all impatience to learn the irrefiftible impulSe that en-
JL	'
forced the deed. I’ll tell you, Sydney : LSaw her beauteous, and I had proved her virtuous; theSe ill-matched companions were in her breaft twins tied by nature.” I parlied for a division, but finding little hopes of accommodation, I agreed for the incumbrance.
The Trinket.
123
fembled vours
brance, and purchafed her with matrimony.
Your letter is jufl come to my hands; I conSidered, and peruSed the charaOers a thouSand times—the writ-
it mud: be conSeffed, greatly re-
; the name, the Seal, and Some triding peculiarities fpeak my friend j but the didlion, the fenti-ments, and the pretty employment you have afiigned me, are highly diverting. And So really I am to Seek out the pretty fugitive—why, prithee ydney,
feme point of
c
doH thou imagine there
O
light
ffronger
which Shines on thy Emma—which dif-tinguilhes her from the beauties of her fex, and that the charmer is to be discovered by the beaming radiance ? Pray, my good friend, inform me in your next, where the notable Search is to commence, through what diftridt I am to purfue the flying fair, or whether you would have me receive at once the
G 2
noble
124
The Trinket.
t
Tioble order of knight-errantry
mount my Rolinante—refcue diStrell ed damfels—brave all dangers—ob Jige wandering heroes to acknowledge your Dulcinea’s charms, till her beauty and my valourous atchievements are
the objects of univerfal admiration.
—_ -	*'*
Ha! ha! ha! pardon, good Sydney; it was but thy likcnefs in the grotto excited the guilty rifibility
Even Such a thing.
So mute, So dead in look. So woe-begone. Drew Priam’s curtain at the dead of night. And would have told him half his Troy was
burnt.
99
Quoting, as I live ! and the inimitable Shakefpeare, the firft bard 1 have contributed to immortalize.—Well,this matrimony is an excellent brightener oS the memory—but to the grotto.
In the name of wonder, by what unaccountable rafhnefs were you actuated ? Confefs now, that, notwithlfand-
ing
The Trinket,
125
ing your triumphs, you are in theSe things a very novice. If at any time you want employment, favour me with the Sequel of your romance, and believe me
Sincerely yours^.
Danvers
A H
L E T T E R XIX.
Seaton to Lady Eliza
Beauclerk.
, Eliza, how are the arrows of adverfity Sharpened, when pointed by the hand we love : other Sorrows may indeed Slightly afFeCt' us, but the heart is deeply wounded by the unkindneSs of a friend, in whofe bofom it was accuftomed to repofe. Reduced even to depend on others for fublillence, my fall I imagined was complete, and that misfortune could
G
3
not
126
The Tr I n k e t.
not fink me lower : alas! the wretched Emma is not beyond the reach of malice; and the cruel Sydney would deprive her, even of the “ immediate jewel of her foul,”—fpare me the repetition.—Ah, think your Emma ufed only to the Soothing vows of friend-fhip, Shocked by the moft indelicate propofals; nor wonder that fhe Scorned to Submit to the painful neceffity of receiving continual favours, which, though Mr. Sydney could not cancel, he taught her to defpife.—-My resolution was fixed, and I employed the night previous to my departure, in writing to my Fanny——at length the rifing fun adorned the walks where I had Spent So many tranquil hours, yet I entered the chaiSe without a it drove off—and I difeovered your Emma was not born to play the heroine : Fanny was ever prefent in idea, accufing my unkindneSs 5 and as' absence ever glofies the failings of the
offender,
The Trinket.
127
offender, even Mr. Sydney appeared lefs culpable.—We palTed a cottage Surely Said I, on the humble roof inhabited by innocence, peace moll eafily defcends.—I flopped the pofli-lion, and alighted—If, Madam, (replied a young woman, in anSwer to my enquiry) you will condeScend to Share my apartment ly,” interrupted I, and followed her
“ Moll willing-
in.
An elderly woman was Spinning by the fire, to whom, though time had given wiSdom, it had not taught Suspicion—She received me with hospitality, and observing my curioSity raised by the elegant neatneSs every where conspicuous, and the uncommon propriety of her dreSs and language, politely feized the firfl opportunity of informing me, that fhe was the widow of a clergyman, who had left his affairs greatly embarraffed, and that with an only daughter, her loved Cla-
G 4
rinda.
128
The Trinket.
A
rinda, (he fought thoSe pleaSures in retirement, the world was no longer capable of affording. There was a hearty benevolence, an honeff freedom in her manner, when (lie hinted her de-fire to be acquainted with the motives that induced me to Seek Shelter in her cottage. I was unable to refift, and thinking her en-,:itled to confidence, I
O	*
related every occurrence of my life. The gentle Clarinda dropt a tear in pity to my forrows f while Mrs. Lawrence generoufly intreated me to con-fider myfelf at home, nor think of quitting them, but for a more pleaf-
Thus, Eliza, I may a^-gain. experience the charms of friend-fhip, this pleafing fociety, joined to your approbation, and a convitSion of the integrity of my intentions, (hall conflitute the future happinefs of
ing afylum.
Your
Emma

'*■ V
The Trinket.
129
LETTER XX.
4
Augustus Sydney, ESt to Sir
George Danvers.
H, without doubt, pride is never better difguiSed, than when it borrows the Semblance of humility it muft be confelTed, however, tny luck has been Singular, but nature gives that merit fortune diSplays.^—A Suitable
introdu(ftion this—“ to
w

you
cry—v/hy really, Danvers, to the pret-tieSl epiStle imaginable, and which, aS-Suming all the SerlouSneSs I poSTeired, I Sat down with a determined resolution to transcribe—^butTome unlucky idea has put my gravity to flight Strangely diScompoSed the purpoSed etiquette.—Surely dame nature was actuated by Some malicious intention, when flie endued me with this power to charm all hearts, and foreSeeing
G
5
too
130
The Trinket.
too, that it would not be my method to conceal the talent beneath a napkin.—Yet I remember to have found my equal j a Smart girl, who had more vivacity than underllanding, more archnefs than fenlibility. But to the letter-—you have Seen lady Juliet Of-nay, a young woman, in every refpect perfedly plealing ; we frequently met
in private company
fhe Somehow
discovered, what fhe termed the vir-tues of my heart-—the mere tribute humanity pays to indigence.—Commendation from the lips of a pretty woman is Sure to pleafe, and' perhaps vanity was the motive, that induced me to treat her with particular attention—her idea, however, Seldom accompanied me beyond her prefence ; and when I left England, fhe was entirely forgotten.
In this letter fhe modeflly difclofes her partiality \ and in the pretriefl
terms, relates the events that have Sue-
' r
ceeded
The Trinket.
131
ceeded lince fhe faw me: an uncle's death has rendered her miftrefs of a a large fortune, yet an avaricious parent would facrifice her to the duke of ——, a wretch whofe foie diftiniStioii is an ancient title—and who, with im-menfe wealth, never purchafed enjoyment for hirnfelf, or eafe for others. Thus Situated, She has but one resource—** If Mr. Sydney’s flattering diftindlions refulted from the approba-
tion of his heart ?
97
Sweet novice !
thy ingenuous fimplicity renders them Synonymous.—She has already, Danvers, left her father’s manfion, and diredfs her route towards a Sweet retreat in Berkshire, where, if this billet is unnoticed. She hopes to Spend her days in privacy.—Her youth palliates the romantic Scheme, and her charming confidence evinces the rectitude of that boSom from wTich She judges others—but I will purfue the lovely fugitive} I will reprefent to her
G 6
the
13-2'
The T r I n k e t.
the pleasures She relinquishes—the adC-miration of an adoring multitude, and
the
of her friends.
I will
.»
convince her by this unaccountable-flight Ihe rifques^ her hitherto untainted reputation 5.and, falling at her feet,, ponjure her, by all Sli,e holds moSf; valuable, to liflen to her
SydneYo,
Jim
LETTER XXL
Seaton to Lady Eliza Beauclerk.
^^OULD you, Eliza, have believed' even folitude productive of adventure Yefterday evening, as Clarinda,. her mother, and myfelf were walking, arm in arm, deeply engaged in natural philofophy, vve were alarmed by re peated Screams in a femal which Seemed to . proceed from the road > Clarinda and 1 ran with all pof-
£bl

e voice^

' 'Jr
The T R I «	® •
^3
X


€ble fwiftnefs to afford the aflillance we were able, while the good Mrs. Lawrence hurried after us^ The fird; obje6t that Saluted our eyes was a poft-chaiSe hanging on one fide, with the wheel at Some didance, and a young woman lying upon the bank pale and apparently lifelefs — the: poffillion, perfectly unconcerned, was employed in repairing his machine,
I took a bottle of Salts from
my
pocket, and in a fliort time She recovered. Never, Eliza, had I beheld a more elegant form.
cc
A native grace-
Sat fair proportioned on her polilhed limbs^. Veil’d in a Simple robe.”
The exaCfeft fymetry of features, and the delicate turn of a countenance ex-preffive of flrong fenfibility, rendered her extremely interefting.—She looked round her with aftoniQiment, and after a pretty apology for the trouble flie
had
134
The Trinket.
had occafioned, enquired of the driver whether the chaife was ready for her to purfue her journey—he informed her that it was not in his power to repair it, and that flie might rifque her life in proceeding. Mrs. Lawrence came up to us juft time enough to hear the conclulion of his Speech, and in-.ftfted that the fair ftranger Iliould give us leave to conduct her to the cottage : She complied, with many expreffions of gratitude, and accompanied us leaning on my arm.—You may, if you pleafe, atteod us, and imagine the lovely unknown, Mrs. Lawrence, Clarinda, and
f
myfelf, partaking a frugal, but elegant
re
past j
the conversation refined.
Sprightly, Sentimental. — About ten o’clock we Separated, and I arofe early thi|^ morning to write to my Eliza, but will now lay down my pen, and join the Sweet girl, who has been Some
time in the garden.
Mifs
The Trinket.
13s
Mils Lawrence in continuation.
Oh, madam, fhe is gone 1 the dear mifs Seaton—never, never again Shall we behold our lovely fufFerer.-—For fome time before breakfafl (lie was in the alcove with the young lady that arrived here laSt night: I did not think proper to join them, left I ftiould interrupt their converfation, and when they appeared I plainly perceived they had been both in tears. Soon after the tea-things were removed, my mother propofed a walk, and we had juft agreed to defer it to the evening, when the door opened, and a figure, the moft elegant imaginable, entered the room, the fair Stranger clafped her hands, and exclaiming, “ it is too much !’’ funk fenfelefs in my arms. The perfon who occalioned the alarm flew to her, but mifs Seaton caught his attention : perceiving herfelf observed.
1,6
The Trinket.
ferved, She Hepped inlfantaneouHy towards him. Seized his hand, and conduded him to the next apartment. In the mean time the young lady recovered, and enquired witb emotioii for her Sydney > I begged her to re-pofe herfelf, and aiTured her he would Soon return j: but She Shook her head,, as if doubtful w'hether She might believe me. At length the bell in the next room rang,'—the Servant attended, and I could dillindly hear mifs Seaton’s voice; about ten minutes after, Slae entered, her countenance illumined with delight, and beckoning
Mr
We
to the
lady Juliet, garden (where we were Some time after joined by the lovers) and were
juft
entering
an alcove, w'hcn the
boy who ufually carries our melfages
up to us, and Spoke in a low voice
came
to mifs Seaton-^Mr. Sydney threw
Juliet
into
The Trinket.
I
firll imagined it
into a Separate walk, we prefently loft fight of them. Your charming friend dcSired we would return to the houfe, informed thefe lovers had been long attached, that her ladylhip had a prior claim to Mr. Sydney’s heart, and that file entirely pardoned a conduct towards herfelf lefs culpable than (he at
in the parlour wa found the clergyman of the rieareft. village—our guefts foon after entered but mifs Seaton Seemed the only one in company perfectly at eafe, and informing him we were ready, prepared; herfelf to give away the bride. At length the ceremony was accomplilh-ed, and Mr. Sydney approached to fa-lute his Juliet.—-The fortitude which had hitherto fupported mifs Seaton, at this inftant forfook her, and but for Mr. Sydney’s Supporting arm £he had fallen lifelefs to the ground no longer able to contain himfelf Look up, my Emma, cried the frantic

138
The Trinket.
tic youth, and blefs the facrifice thou
hart: commanded

at the found of
his voice (he revived, and her eyes fireaming with tears, retired to her own apartment:—the bridegroom fat the pidture of defpair, his eyes rivetted to the fpot where laft he faw her, then fuddenly recolledling himSelf, he
arofe, went up
Jul
and
preffing her hand to his heart, attempted to fpeak, but variety of contending
We
and when I
pafllons prevented utterance.
left them
together
thought mifs Seaton had Sufficiently indulged her grief, I went up to her
but in vain I Searched the
room
houfe, the garden, and the alcove, fhe was no where to be found. I then queftioned the Servants, and learnt from them, that fhe got into a chaiSe, which waited at a Small difiance, and which I concluded to he the Same that brought Mr. Sydney. My mother was of opinion we Should not inform
7
either
The Trinket.
139
either him or lady Juliet of her departure, and when they enquired for her, we told them Ihe begged to be excufed appearing. — Mr. Sydney feemed dilTatisfied with the anSwer ; but expreffing his fenSe of civility, ordered his chaife ther replied, that.
my
mo-
flattering herfelf he would have honoured her with his company for the day, fhe had dif-charged	—he framed a polite ex-
cufe, and entreated fhe would perrnit her boy to fetch another* which arriving foon after, we embraced the bride, and wifhlng her happinefs, bade her farewell.
Thus, madam, have I endeavoured to give you a clear account of the fur-prifing changes this day has witneffed. Your ladyfhip’s candour, by allowing for the confufion of my mind, wdll make apology unnecefTary. Ah, lady Eliza ! how greatly muft you be in-terefled for mifs Seaton, when the in«
timacy.
140
The T r i n k e t .
timacy, only of a few weeks, has ren dered her expreffibly dear to her
Clarinda Lawrence.
LETTER XXII.
Finchley to Mifs Melville.

•>
IS an ill wind that blows no-body good.” — I have been teazing old Darcy to inform me who-were the authors of this, fo juSlly celebrated line •—IA'impof'tey — peace be
with them, while we defcend from
^ > •; ... . ■ - -
conjedfure, and fee the proverb verified. I wrote ^you an account of the humorous accident, and of poor Charlotte’s difappointment, which, indeed,.
file felt too ffrongly, to leave, me an
Though
unfympathizing Mr. Sydney ufed his utmoft endeavours to fileace that officious babbler, Fame,
t
th©
\
T H E T R I N K E T.
I4I ,
tbe affair got wind, and a lady Blue-mantle was found in every houfe, to propagate the ridiculous intelligence. Fortunately a journey to London was propofed, as the mod: effetSual means to Silence the thoufand bufy tongues
or to avoid lillening to them }—’Tis an ill wind,” &c.—my heart danced to the propofal, and with almoft forgotten agility I Sprung into the carriage that was to convey us
———From purling brooks.
Old falhion’d halls, dull aunts, and ‘Croaking
rooks.

Our journey was delightful j every Smart equipage delighted my attention j—I watched the mile-ffones with the mod: fcruDulous exadneSs, and the landlord of every inn repeatedly an-fwered my enquiry how far we were yet didant from London. At length, the rattle of coaches, and the glare of flambeaux, announced our arrival, and
a Smart
142
The T r i n k e t.
though care-
O y
a fmart houSe in Bruton-ffreet was prepared to receive us. Mifs Darcy unSolds with rapture the pleafunes of this gay metropolis, and little doubts but in every alTembly die diall find a Sydney, with a heart more fenfibie of her perfections—Good girl! die takes the world as it goes: lefs in attaining the friendlhip, and tinSolicitous to deferve the delightful applaufe paid by Superior merit, die enters every companv with anxiety ; the coxcomb gazes on charms, of which none feem more confcious than the pofielTor j no compliment to them pad es unheeded ; and while men can flatter, Charlotte Darcy will be happy. This mornin<?, at breakfafi, v/as de-
bated the important qiieSlion, What public place Ihoidd be firil honoured with our appearance ? Routs, drums, hurricanes, ridottos, auClions, mafque-rades,' operas, and plays, Charlotte d i fc u fie d w i t i> 0 ri u 1 u a .1 s 1 o a ue n c e. We
A
then
The Trinket.
143
then proceeded to adjud; the ceremonial of vilits; nor was the fate of nations ever debated with profounder gravity.
You know not how greatly you are obliged for my condefcenlion, friend-fliip is a bagatelle line ladies alTume at pleafure, and of which, they as readily difpoffeSs themfelves^ when diffipa-tion fatigues, they fly to it as a re-fource from ennui. In my confcience, I believe when our modern belles ba^ nilhed lincerity from the heart, they fixed profeffion on the tongue : whether indolence firff gave rife to the arrangement, I am at a lofs to determine, though they have fince found it mightily conducive to the eafe they value: they had fo often recourfe to the little repolitory of proteffation, that in procefs of time they Seldom opened their lips, but everlafting friendihip, conffant remembrance, and ceafelefs Service, flew out, unthought
of


The T r I n k b t.
by the fair profelTor.—The coach waits} we go to Taviftock-IIreet, and, truly fashionable, confume the hrll part of the day in preparation for our evening appearance.
II o’clock.
‘‘ La bdla che aAoro^^]\^^ returned Lrotn the opera—and Charlotte retired, fo pleaSed, fo delighted, not with
the theatre, the mulic, or the dancers,
\
but the mod: enchanting didincStion f to be gazed upon, admired, applauded by a red coat cockade and Shoulder-knot, thofe irrelidible inlignias—ah.
how
charming 1
The houfe was
crowded when we entered, and we had mod probably dood the remainder of the performance, but that fome
gentlemen feeing our did refs, ro and politely indded on our accepting their feats : at the end of the Second a£f, we found they had all deferted us, but a very agreeable officer, who feem-ed druck with Mifs Darcy’s appearance.
The Trinket.
145
ance, and affiduoufly attentive in offering all the little civilities cudom authorizes. This was fufficient to damp him the reigning favourite, the than who admires Charlotte^s perfon is fure to pleafe; though wanting every amiable quality, wit, worth, and beauty are lavidily bedowed, till like Pigma-lion, Ihe loves the Self-created form you tell me from this feene of gaiety you expe£t entertaining letters 5 let us fee how philosophically you fupport the disappointment, and believe tho’ your Belvidera wants wit to embelliSh trifles, fincerity is the inmate of her bofom, and guides the hand that af-fures you of unalterable affection.
VoL. I.
H
LET-
14^
The Trinket
LETTER XXIII.
Mils Seaton to Lady Eliza
Beauclerk.
OULD you believe it, Eliza, your Emma is preparing to commence hiftorian, and celebrate her own adventures : Surely they would prove an edifying and acceptable preSent to the world, and more clearly demonllrate the iniiability of fortune, than, the laboured treatiSes of unexperienced reafon. The caflle—the Sweet retreat, were neither of them my deStined residence-—behold me now landed on a quiet diore, fixed in the family of an honed; farmer, and endeavouring to render mySelf uSeful, by engaging in domeftic concerns: here my Eliza, I hope to Spend my quiet days, uninter-rupted by future change. Alas ! is not this the flattering expectation I
long
The Trinket*
147
long had formed ; and yet, lince lall we parted, I have learnt,
To bear with accident, and every change of
various life.
To ftruggle with advcrSitv.
99

I had begun to write to you from the
I had described a lovely
cottage
her in the garden
Granger, and quitted my pen, to join
the conversation
fell inSenSibly on love^die Sighed my heart re-echoed the Soft complaint, and we gazed upon each other in Silence. Ah, madam, Lid the Sweet Juliet, will you love the woman,whofe only claim to your affeDion, is, that fhe will purchafe it wnth unlimited confidence.”-—Think, Eliza, what I felt when Ihe informed me, Sydney was likewise mafler of her heart. I lilfened to the representation of his perfon and manners, which (he drew in all their infinuating charms, with an emotion I did not attempt to diS-
H 2
g u i fe.
I4S
The Trinket.
guiSe, and which the mistaken girl attributed Solely to friendship.
We reached the houSe, and break-faSl was Scarcely over, when Mr. Sydney entered the room—I felt fincerely for the amiable Juliet, and my own trifling Sorrows were loft in hers.~—I went up, and begged him to accompany me to the next apartment—there I represented his Juliet’s lituation and her love.—He frequently interrupted me, but 1 infiftcd on being heard, and painted her charming form, her refined understanding, and artleSs fimpli-city of manners, in their moft alluring colours.—I beSought him to eonfider the miSery that (unleSs prevented by himSelf) the artleSs Juliet muft reap from her attachment; from her unprecedented flight j and that the good opinion of the world once Slighted, is Seldom regained.—In fliort, Eliza, no plea likely to influence his heart, or argument that might convince his un-
derftanding
The Trinket.
140
w
Ignorant
clerilanding was omitted ; but it wer endleSs to repeat the numberleSs objections he urged, and I bluSh to fay, that your Emma prevented what fire would have given her life to have ac-compliflied.—I informed Mr. Sydney,' that his expectations from me were as ill-founded, as they were prefump-tuous : that had I remained of lady Juliet’s prior claim, I would never have received bis addreffes, and that the infult he had already offered, was the laft to which my innocent familiarity fhould Subject me.—If reconciliation and friendship were the objects of his defire, the alliance I in-treated him to accept, alone could purchafe them.—RecolleCt Mr. Sydney, I continued, the merit you reject, nor confign to regret the beauty whofe only failing is her love for you ; and who, confiding in your honour, has expofed her own.”
H 3	Though
150
The Trinket.
Though he had hitherto defended himfelf with infinite addrefs, he appeared Softened by the laft consideration—I purfued it, and I triumphed : “ enough, thou lovely pleader, difpofe of the man you only can command.” Ah, Eliza! the painful Sacrifice was at length accomplished, and the Sentiment that had enabled me to Support the confiidf, gave place to a thouSand Soft ideas, while all the lover took pod'eiTion of my boSom.—Recolletfing Mr. Sydney muff have arrived here in Some vehicle, I determined it Should convey me from a Scene I found my-felf unable to Support: my journey affords nothing new, but the motives by which it was induced, and the hospitable reception that completed it. Can I, my Eliza, he ungrateful, or unattached to theSe worthy people.
How greatly do native benevolence, and inborn politeneSs—outfhine that Sludied, artificial civility, the great are
proud
T H Trinket*
^51
proud of!—here we have hearty friend-Ihip, unSullied with profeffion, yet ever ready to adift—love without ar~
beauty without coquetry—and fwains without deceit.
The mod dignified didindlion here, is virtue; and we meet but to Share the pleaSures of Society: thus, my friend-, I endeavour, by beholding every objedl that Surrounds me in the mod advantageous light it can be placed, to render my abode delightful.—Ah, why am I not dill under lady Amelia’s pro-tedion 1 in my prefent lituation, the, plaudit of my own heart, can only be Seconded by the few that have discernment to Search my motives. Forgive my anxiety, and believe me, the woman who Scorns to Secure the Suffrage of the vulgar. Seldom merits the approbation of the wife.
G 4
LET-
1C2
The Trinket.
LETTER XXIV
Sir George Danvers to Augustus Sydney, Efq. '
•• YESTERDAY
II n O' s
were married^ Augustus Sydney, and lady Juliet Ofnay.”—I Sat down, with a determined resolution to laugh at my creSt-fallen Benedick, but, on Second
m
thoughts, the raillery would be as cruel as unserviceable. — My poor Sydney !—V/ell, it is infinitely divert-
mais courage moyiamtl thanks to lady Amelia, you are perfedly Skilled in old proverbs, and when things are at the worSt, I need not inform you they mud mend.
You and I, you remember, have frequently puzzled our own heads, and diftradled our taylors, that we might lead the fafliions: we have aflumed a thoufand fantaflic fooleries, that we
might
\
The Trinket.
151
might fhew how prettily they became us, and have receive infinite diverfion
No
t
doubt two Such Smart fellows will
from our aukward copyifls.
make even matrimony fafhionable, and the gay, the gallant, ths agreeable, fmit with the ambition of re-fembling us (but without our charming ability to animate every flate) crowd to the temple. On my word, Sydney, as a reward for the pains we take to re-eftablilh the forgotten deity, our images, curioufly carved in marble, fhould adorn the altar.—Ha 1 ha ! ha! I foreSee a mod invincible objeffion, the hypocritic fair ones, forgetting the god they came to worlhip, would, with universal conSent, petition Prometheus to animate the lovely fiatues.
And art thou, Augudus^ in Sober SadneSs, absolutely married ? Heavens in what penitential fit did the black-

robed minister rob thee of repofe ? make Juliet the wife of thy boSom,
to
He
nor

154
4^
The Trinket.
nor once hint the premeditated resolution : but you was right; thefe rigid notions of honour, though they might have excited my admiration, my friendihip Should have prevented you from executing.—Really you poflefs a happy forgetfulnefs^ and if your letter now before me was not a plain con-vidion, I could hardly believe an Emma Seaton ever had exiflence. That amidfl: the pleaSures of your happy li-tuation he is ffill recolleded, a letter only, can afSure
Your
Danvers
LET-

The Trinket.
155
LETTER XXV
Mifs Seaton to Mrs. Lawrence.
CHALL I confefs, my good Mrs.
Lawrence has apparent reafon to accuSe her Emma of ingratitude ? Received and entertained with the warmeft benevolence, fhe returned her difinterefted friendship by involving herfelf and amiable daughter in unexpected difficulty, then fled from the fcene of trouble, and left them to fuf-tain the anxiety the caufed.—Happily, madam, I had acquainted you with the occurrences of my life, and confelled, without reServe, the attachment I found it impoffible to conquer : lady Juliet too, that fatal morning.
made me her confidante :
this ami-
able woman, formerly acquainted with Mr. Sydney, ftill nourished the tender fentiments he had infpired.—I would
^5^
The Trinket.
willingly have returned the trust stie repoSed within my bofom, could I have done it without encreafing her afHidion, without convincing her this faithlefs lover had forgot his vows, and made us equally the dupes of his profeffions. — My dear madam, you are acquainted with the various changes of the day, and your heart will best fuggest the motives which compelled me to quit your hofpitable roof.—Lady Juliet’s difeernment must have informed her of what I endeavoured to conceal—and Mr. Sydney I wisticd to avoid——pardon the fenti-ment, whether it had its fource in vanity, or proceeded from far-stretched refinement j but I confefs I felt a con-feious pride in keeping him ignorant of my dwelling.—Am 1 yet forgiven } or does my fweet Clarinda hear you exclaim, “ The foolish girl, how unfa-tisfactory is this reafoning ?”—Come then, my friend, I will Shew you my
whole
The Tr I nke t.
157
whole foul;
know that I could not
bear to remain a burthen on my generous benefadlrefs, or that your little income fhould be leffened by my participation.—Thus, my ever honoured madam, you find we mujl have parted, at a time, perhaps, when encreafing, friendfhip had rendered the reparation more painful:—at prefent, I folely have realbn to regret the change: where fhall I feek the gentle mo-ralizer, the experienced counfellor fhe, who knew fo well to foften for-row, to revive the languid expedfation, and to exclude defpair \ Tell Clarinda how much I feel her lofs, how fincere-ly I regret our pleafant walks, and believe me.
My dear Mrs. Lawrence,
Your much obliged and grateful
Emma.
LET-
laCS
The TRrNKET.
LETTER XXVL
usTus Sydney, Efq, to Sir
George Danvers.
lafl
T AKE notice, Danvers, the
time I wrote to you was in compliance with your requeff: now to atone the abSence of other entertain^ ment, I take up my pen merely to trifle away the tedious minutes j but I fliall be with you fhortly : the country has loft hts attractions—the winds rife—the frees are ftripped of their verdure, and my ideas are more unenlivening than the defolate profpeCt that infpires them.
That you may not, however, imagine Auguftus Sydney could Support a flate of frigid inactivity, I muft introduce you to a family lately fettled in this neighbourhood. Mr. Stepney Studied at Cambridge with unwearied
diligence.

The Trinket.
diligence, and early threw away his
books that he might read mankind.
Refledion and observation perfect
derllanding.
politenefs
Mr
Soli-
dity and elegance embelliSh each
other, the Scholar and the gent}eman
are united : in his diSeourSe, learning
is free from pedantry, while eaSe,
chearfulnefs, and good humour con
vey instruction from his lips
The
clergyman who accompanied him in
his travels, to whom he is remarkably
attached, has, ever Iince, continued
with him
Mr. Maynard
hn
gular in his tade, as in the virtues of
his heart. — His language is fimple.
but his Sentiments are Sublime: and
while his arguments convince the un-
derftanding, his example, influences
the conduct. A profefled admirer of
antiquity, he dwells with rapture on
the Sculpture, the paintings, the man-
ners of the ancients; and, more from
7
judgment



i6o
The Trinket.
judgment than falfe delicacy, points out and condemns the contraft. He contemplates with delight the wonders of the creation, and is charmed with nature, even in her moll: unpleaf-ing forms. We were yederday in my phaeton, upon a barren heath, and on the brow of a precipice, Shivering with cold, the morning lowered, the hanging ilicles rattled to the hollow winds, and my philofopher admired the contrail,—praifed the goodnefs, the wifdom, that ordained the fweet variety. We have alfo in a cottage, a few miles from us, a mifanthropid:, who avoids the fociety he wants ability to enjoy. I fancy the world are ready to thank a man in his own way thofe who are never pleafed, will feldom pleaSe 3 and he that he is fo expert in discovering the defedfs of mankind, will be frequently elfeemed the original from whence he draws Such
Heigh-ho! I yawn
incef-
admirabl
V
copies
The Trinket.
i6t
%
inceflantly, and moft happily Sevigny comes to diffipate the melancholy: oh, you would die, to fee him, with the utmod attention, liftening to lady Amelia’s defcription of a neft, or to the detail of her feathered dependents.
But I forgot ta inform you, that I intend being in London in about a week j and you know, George, a good houfe is neceflary : will you be fo obliging, to take the trouble of hiring
one—in St. James’s-ftreet—Pall-Mall or any where i—the fituation I fix on will doubtl'efs become the center of the beau monde.—Is there no old gentlewoman of your acquaintaince,. that would engage our domedics? The tafk would not be difficult, for lady Juliet is eafily pleafed; fhe is gentlenefs itfelf—and commendation, could only detract from the merit of
Augustus Sydney.

162
I
The Trinket.
LETTER XXVII.
MiSs Seaton to Lady Eliza
Beauclerk.
F the unexpe(5fedly meeting an amiable friend calls for congratulations, let me demand my dear lady Eliza’s : but that flie may Share the joy She wiHies me, I polfpone the claim, till I informed her, that, walking near the farm, according to my ufual culfom, I was furprifed by the appearance of men on horfeback 5 I would have fought the Shelter of a neighbouring Shed, but the perfons> who caufed the alarm, were So near, that I Should but have expofed in endeavouring to Screen myfelf. The Servant rid forward to open a gate they were to pafs through, while his maSfer walked bis horfe, as if Something uncommon in the appearance of a wo-
mans
The Trinket.
I
luan, in that folitary fituation, demanded his observation ; his too curious attention became impertinent, and not daring to look up, I bent my ffeps towards the houSe, but the ffranger threw himSelf from his horSe, “ and can it pollibly be miSs Seaton ?’* cried be, in a voice with which I was perfeDly acquainted.—Sir Harry Ed-gerton was before me—imagine the kinded things frienddilp, could didlate, and think them lavillied on your Emma. In apologizing for too attentively remarking a woman, whoSe elegant form he thought greatly refembled his mils Seaton, he politely complimented charms, which he profelTed it wasim-poffible to millake y and in concluding his Speech, llightly hinted his curiofi-ty to learn what change of temper, or of fortune, could have fo greatly altered my fituation. Think not I helitated to remove his doubts, or that the unfortunate attachment was
A
forgot:
164 The Trinket.
forgot: no, Eliza, I muft have deSpiSed myfelf had I attempted, by foftening language, to palliate my weakneSs; or to have Secured his elleem by an ungenerous prudence, which had proved me unworthy to poflefs it. He was charmed with what he encouragingly termed my noble franknefs •, blamed Mr. Sydney ; then recolledling his he-roifm in receiving lady Juliet as his bride, was lavilh of encomiums.
He begged I would inform him, where he might have the pleaSure of waiting on me; and when I had pointed out my habitation, mounted his horfe, and with a graceful bow, rode from me. At dinner, I aflced my honeff friends, whether Sir Harry Edgerton bad a houSe, or connedions, in this part of the world : you would have been .delighted, could you have wit-nelTed their Surprize at my ignorance, or heard the hearty praife they gave their generous landlord : I had touched
The Trinket. 165
cd a topic on which they talked with
rapture; and the unpolilhed, though
expreffive eloquence, proceeding from
hearts incapable of deceit, was an in-
cenfe never offered but at the Shrine of
merit. Excufe my expatiating on this
fubjedt:—ah, Eliza, how welcome is
the appearance of a valued companion,
when we have been ufed to look
around us, on faces unenlightened with
the fmile of friendfhip. Your letter
is juft brought me—how unjuftly you
accufe your Emma, and knowing that
the reafon ftill continues, which firft
induced her to rejeD: your flattering
propofa), why will you reduce her to
the painful neceflity of contending
not only with her own inclinations,
hut with her dearer felf—her loved
?
Though my father would not dif-clofe the reafon that prompted him to refufe his fandlion to my deflre of vi-
you, it perhaps acquired weight
O'
D
8
frons
I
The Trinket.
from fecrecy ; and as I never knew him guided by caprice, I willingly af-quiefced j in wLat^ I confefs I was not able to unriddlewere I now to come to you, it would furely prove that I repined at the authority to which I Submitted.—You would have me appear in the gay wmrld, my friend^ and kindly conclude, the numerous circle would viev/ your Emma with your flattering partiality. Dear Eliza, I laugh at the mifake, to which your ignorance of that world you court me to, betrays you.' There you have yet to learn, what the goodneSs of your own heart never could fuggeSf; and a fight Survey of life will teach you, thole who have nothing to offer but gratitude, are denied even an opportunity of exerting that. —We are told
f
“ Ambition flrft Sprung from the bleft abodes,
/
The glorious fault of angels, and of gods.’^
How
KE Trinket.
167
How then is your Emma degenerated, whoSe heart, engrolied by friendfhip, knows not to admit it. Still let this da ngerous palllon continue to animate the bread of kings and heroes; women and friends aSpire but to the elegant reciprocations of Social love. Yes, Eliza, neither the tempting piDure you have drawn of pleafures that await me, nor the profpedts of advantage you have unfolded, have power to lure me from this Solitude.—I opened your letter, I perufed it—and I lighed a Second time, and I Sighed dill deeper.
Unfeeling girl ! are you yet to be informed, the always-wife may excite our wonder, but cannot conciliate our affedtion. Why was Mr. Sydney fo dudioufiy avoided ? and from what part of my conduct, have you learnt the neceflity of furprefling his name ?
Let me deliver you, Eliza, from the" difingenuous fecrecy j — while my paflion was innocent, reafon drength-
ened
i68
The Trinket.
r~
ened the fond approbation his merit enforced.—The fcene in the grotto, previous to my departure, firft taught me men were born to triumph over the tender, and to delude the limple, I refolved by tearing Mr. Sydney from my heart, never more to fubject my-felf to a like mortifying affront.—The cure was nearly accomplifhed, when I again found him, and found him worthy of my affection—thus amiable, I yielded him to another, and in accuf-toming myfelf to view him as the huf-band of lady Juliet, love has loft it-
felf in friendfhip.
Tell
me
then.
where does he feek amufement ? Gay, fprightly, and . agreeable i the park, the opera, and play, divide his joyous hours 5 or tenderly domeftic, fome are, perhaps, dedicated to his
Juliet.
That, happinefs, frequently
banifhed from the great, may take fanduary in his dwelling, ftncerely
prays
Your
Emma Seaton*
The Trinket.
1

LETTER XXVIIL
Col. Lester toCnARLES Elliot,ESq.
T is eafy, Charles, to teach others wifdom; every man is a Zeno for his friend; and, like my fpeculative phi-lofopher, can preach up reaSon, floicifm, discretion.—‘‘ To Rome with reafon or, prithee, retain it, the guide of graver mortals.-—To fatisfy you, however, this affair is by no means the ne plus ultra of my wiflies; the troublefome monitor I have juff baniQied will fometimes intrude, and loudly demand to be fatished.
Hang it ! cannot a man play the fool a little, but thefe bofom-ferpents mark every digreffion with a fling.—-Heavens! what animation do the features of my Charlotte want ? — could vivacity give new lightnings to thoSe eyes, or fen-fibility encreafe their foftneSs.— In the gay tulip, we Seek not the fragrance of the Sweet-briar—we gaze on tlielovely bloflom, nor repine at the backwardness of the fruit. And, however naturalifls
I	may

The Trinket.
may tell us, the things that are mod uSeful are graced with the mod ravifh-ing beauty j experience will contradict orlilence them. Who would hefitate to prefer the fwan to her aukward and ambling copyid; and yet, none will re-fuSe alient to the Superior utility of the latter.— All this is mighty conclufive; but I dare fwear, that a hundred miles from Charlotte, you exclaim with Juba,
“ ’Tis not a fet of features or complexion.
The tindfure of a fk.in, that I admire.”
It is a fad thing to have the wrong fide of an argument^ however, Charles, I can rave in heroics as loud as you 5 and drown your reaSoning, in
“ But Ihe is fair—Oh 1 how divinely fair.”
And how much longer mud this voluntary retirement continue, ere with old coat, a white beard, and an iron lamp, you deliver maxims of prudence to reform this generation, and guide the next? You mud confefs I am the mod conjiderate young man in the world ^ fo Solicitous for the benefit of
pode-
an
em-
Ths Trinket!'.
that I forbear to prefs your
/
return to the metropolis, left the hours, dedicated to their improvement, Should be moft 'unphUofophically ployed ; or my Epidetus commence Epicurean. Yet> if you wilh to quicken youf relifli for groves and ftreams, come to Bruton-ftreet •, and, as love and folitude endear each other, I warrant we will fend you back a moft enthuftaftic admirer of the rural and the ftupid. I know the lingu-
have
we
larity of your Sentiments ; together traced the portrait, and dwelt on the thouSand virtues, with which your fancy hath embellillred the ideal form. Here you will find them drawn to the life-—Soft, modeft, lively. Sentimental, and difcreet; Mifs Finchley pleaSes without deligning it: fhe wins the heart, ere we are confcious of the attack—but
“ Charlotte is faircft where thouSands are fair.’*
It is impoflible to be otherwife than captive to her beauty. And, to do
I 2
the
172
The Trinket.
the girl juflice, her heart is not guarded on' all fides j on a Short attack, it promises to capitulate: after all, Charles, nne affaire de ceeur, is at bell but a filly bufinefs, yet mighty necefi'ary to trifle ofF that trifle, life. Come, come, Elliot, clap fpur to your horfe, ,.yiew your heroine, and admire mine; or fuppofe you give me a commiflion ; I’ll court Belvidera, marry her as your proxy; and rerhain, thine and Charlotte’s very devoted
Lester*
LETTER XXIX.
«
Sir Harry Edgerton to Mifs
Seaton,
_	t
CT^HE inconceivable reluctance with
which I lafl: night parted from Mifs Seaton, was too evident to efcape observation ; could She as eafily have penetrated the heart which fighed to unburthen itfelf, fhe had- discovered friendilrip, efteem, and refpectful ten-
6
dernefs
The Trinke t.
^73
derneSs courting her acceptance. The
generality of your Sex, madam, would
deSpiSe a ftyle untinged with flattery.
and ridicule the alfedtionate admirer.
whole add refs, an equal flranger to de-
ceit and adulation, breathes but the lio-
nefl dictates of lincerity. Examine your
heart, my charming friend, that heart
v/hich Seeks felicity in imparting it; it
v/ill plead for me with the ftrongefl: do-
and induce you to receive the
quence j
man, who finds affluence itfelf unfatis-
fadtory, till your acceptance teaches her
to charm.—I have been unfortunate :
you delight in Softening afflidlion : I
have felt the anguifh ofdifappointment;
your example will inffrudt me to rife
Superior to it. I have been young, I
have loved with the ardor of enthufi-
aSm j and the figh which heaves my bo-
fom, is a tribute to the mofi: amiable of
her Sex. Ah, Mifs Seaton, why did my
tongue refuSe to obey its maficr, when
it Should have Sworn you only have
power to erafe the Sorrows he laments
1

why



^74
The Trinket;
why falter,when it Should have en-* treated you to accept the hand, tlie heart, the name of
Edgerton, * **
•tr



LETTER XXX.
Augustus Sydney,
Lucius Sevigny.
t®
A ! ha 1 ha ! well, take your kingdoms, your empires, ye CteSars, ye Alexanders-—go, and unmolehed enjoy all the pleafures they can afford—leave me ffill the dear delight the fpirit of avanture gives me, and take the world.
** Oh ! woman, lovely woman, nature
made you.”—Why, faith, nature did make you—and in you formed, all that could touch the heart of Sydney with rapture, joy, and exSlacy. On the day “ the brighteff fure that ever rofe.” Shenifone and Richardfon Swore I Should accompany them to the mafquerade, which was to be at the Pantheon laSt night—with an indolent indifference,
I or*^
/
The Trinket.
175
Somehow or other I fuppofe
I ordered my valet to bring me a white and gold domino to St. James’s, and tumbled into Shenllone’scoach with very little alacrity—*the coachman, who had rather more Spirit, did us the favour
God
knows how—to overturn a very elegant equipage, juft as we got into OxSord-road j in which were a gentleman, his wiSe, and another lady, acquaintance oS Shenftone’s, whom we consequently took with great pleaSure into the carriage, and by the light of the flambeau, the elegance of figure conSpicuous in the younger Struck me exceedingly.-—Con--found the Champagne, thought I, it is for ever drawing my fenSes into a Snare,, which will one day or other be too powerful for my judgment.—I had drank a good deal that day, and it was uSeleSs-to make any more reflections about it.
I Swore mySelf the proteCtor of the charming JelTy, and with all my uSual gattee de cceuTt began to make love to her the moment we entered the room.
iVJy
I
4
/
iy6 The Trinket.
“MyGod, criedfhe, is itpoffibleyou can think me foweak, as to credit Such pofeflions as thefe, from a man who has never even feen my face — ceafe, I beg of you, to mortify my vanity.”
** Cruel Mifs Scarfdale, and is this the rew^ard for all that diligence with which I have fo eagerly fought an in-trodu(5tion to your acquaintance.—You are, indeed, greatly miftaken, if you are not convinced every lovely feature that envious mafk now veils, (Shenllone had whifpered me fhe was an angel) is deeply engraven on nty heart. —Ah, added I, preffing her hand, when fortune has done fo much for me, do not unjuftly fix that cruel fling, your difdain cannot fail of bringing it in my faithful breaSlf * Returning from gaining further intelligence of Shenllone, I found an impertinent fellow hovering round her, and who bad plagued her with Some filly queflion, in half a dozen languages ; to which She feeqied by no means to chufe making an anfwer. “ Who have
you
T H E T R I N K E T.
177
you got there,” faid I, obferying her embarradment. “ A man, replied She, who has no merit but that of having
learned to exprefs an idea in feveral lan-^ guages, which is not worth hearing in
one.

The fellow feemed inclined to quarrel with me.—I was filly—and fome very high words pafTed. Mifs ScarSdale terrified, taking off her malk, feized me by the an m j and intreating I would do the fame—begged me to conduO: her to her friend. Oh, Danvers, I could at that moment do nothing.—The amiable fen-fibllity exprelTed in the moff: beautiful face I had ever Seen, joined to the graceful dignity of her figure, left me unmindful that I had repeatedly Sworn, thofe charms were familiar to me.
‘‘ Yes, madam, faid I, as I led her down th e room j my life were well loft for fo much beauty ; and my honour would ceale to deferve the name, could it know any other command than yours.”—But our evil genius was not fo ealily fhaken
15
off 5
I7S
The Trinket,
off; unmafidng, he followed us, and dilcovering himfelf to be Barton, was fifty times more boilLerous, more impertinent.—It was ufelefs for me to attempt to reafon with him—^he had fwallowed. it at his tavern, in Burgundy and claret., I gave him a card of my relidence; it would not do, and my diftrelSed fair one infilled on getting into her chair.
“ Cruel girl, faid I, to have known you only to know that I mull be miferable: in being baniShed your company and conversation.”
“ No : anfwered die, blufhing, you have no need to fear being baniShed them, while it is agreeable to you to call in Berkley-fquare. My mother has a card-party to-morrow j Shall I tell her Slie may hope for the favour of feeing you of the number	—With rapture
iccepted the invitation, and after fol-
a
lowing her chair home in my own, wag Set down at my houSe ; and then, as mufingly fauntered up flairs, for the firfS » me the reflection had occurred that
night,.
The Trinket. 179
night, recolleDed I had a wife.—Ah, faid I, we take our piety, our liberty, with us to the altar, and Sacrifice the latter to the former there j but our paffions we bring back with us^—and mine can own no midrefs but Mifs Scarfdale. Pity me, Danvers; perhaps when'.I fee; her next, a cruel coldnefs may have taken place of that complacency : the in-difibluble knot may have reached her ears; and the married Sydney mufi: be content with* the cold civility of polite-
nefs, while the lover at the mafquerade had nothing left to wilh.—I clofed not my eyes the whole night-—their lids
Seemed fearful to exclude an i
mage.
lovelier than ever before had firuck my wondering fight : but may I perhh,; if one idea has entered my imaginatibn'i VvTich has not been pure as her foul, and fpotlefs as the Snowy whitenefs of. her drefs. Barton came to me with his elder brother this morning, and apologized for his behaviour, with more gentility than I had thought him capable
1.6
of

1
8o
The Trinket.
of—I Swore I too was intoxicated—but
f
with this difference, that every moment encreafed my admiration, and added defpair to madnefs—while his had in a a few hours quitted him, with the pleaf-ing refledion that nature had put it in his power to make ample compenfation for all the disadvantages of art. Adieu I am going to equip mySelf j would I could Say for conquefl—but it is for Jeflyi—^^and
“ Cupid cannot wound her.
For flie has all his darts,'’
LETTER XXXI.
MiSs Seaton to Lady Eliza
Beauclerk.
gLIZA, you are obeyed—nay more, your kind intreaties but enabled your friend more chearfully to execute, what her heart, not waiting your Sanction, had determined; I anfwered Sir Harry Edgerton with an explicitnefs many would condemn ; but I am ignorant
why
The Trinket.
i8i
9>
why candour diould languilli in SuSpencej^ or a man of worth feel the power he has imparted.—Though fenlible that mo-dell pride enhances the value of female conceffionSj I would avoid the appearance of an extorted promife \ nor make the man I married, fo poor a compliment, as reluctantly to accept his offered hand. Let thofe of our Sex, who miftake reServe for modeSly, endeavour to diSguife their feelings, while I—pardon the comparison—“RefpeCt thyfelf has ever been my favourite tenet : and you muft remember, how warm an advocate I am for a principle of Self-importance, which generally proves a powerful auxiliary to the virtue that gave it birth. The timid man, determined to think of himfelf no higher than he ought to think, admires inifances of virtue,, which, but for pufilanimity, he might rival 5 and he never conquers, becaiife he trembles to engage.—Left you laugh at my vainly arrogating refpeCt from the imaginary Superiority, let us return to
Sir
JB2
The Trinket,
Sir Harry.—Ah, Eliza, how often have I combated an impertinent opinion, highly disgraceful to our fex, that
a
9f
woman never marries her firff choice; now, muSi; I decline the liffs: alas, is not my example more convincing than my’ arguments ? Where then Shall we Seek for delicacy, for conllancy, if they are not inmates of the female bread: ? Pity me, Eliza and yet believe Sir Harry is the man I painted; fweetnefs and vivacity are confpicuous in his countenance, and humanity is the charaCterilHc of his heart j the fentiments I feel for him, he: only can inspire: more tranquil, yet tender as thoSe I once experienced, they partake the SoftneSs of love, and the un — diaken firmnefs of friend(liip and edeem. . Indeed I do not need the pity I requed-ed.j or if you will bedow it, ah,, pity” your Emma, that Ihe cannot with confidence look upon her dedined hufband,. and declare her heart has felt for him? alone..
Yourr
The T rinket
1%
W Ii ere Is
Your offers are very kind ; but neat-Eefs and fimplicity are the firSt of bridal ornaments, and all I hope to boaSf. Nor am I wholly deffitute of lefs unfashionable embelliSliments; a cafket of my mother’s, the keys of which my father gave me during his laft illnefs, and' which curiolity has not yet impelled me to open, will, I doubt not, afford more than I wifh for. lady Juliet, mifs Sydney, and her brother ^ Start not, Eliza ; that brother is no longer loved. After perufing Sir-Harry’s letter, 1 helitated—I queftioned-my heartit anfwered as I wifhed, and! cleared every Scruple..
“ Beyond the fix’d and fettled ruJes^
Of vice and virtue in the Schools..”
Had I doubted my ability to love^ Hoj-nour, and obey, or could I have beea' hot juji to Edgerton, L hadTcorned to-
become his wife.
I fee him from my window ; hecroiTes the neareSl field, and queSlions an ho-neSi labourer—^.he gives him money :
ah.
I
T H E T R I N K E T.
ah, how amiable he appears, how worthy the affection of your
Emma.
LETTER XXXII.
MiSs Finchley to Mifs Melville.
Have laughed immoderately at my dear Lucy’s mighty prudential epif-file. And fo, you really wifh me to accept this man, who, with an air as fo-lemn as a parifh funeral, and a brain as vacant as his countenance, fets up for a wit, and a philoSopher : happily for himfelf, be is too infignificant for conviction ; and enjoys, unenvied, the eminence of imaginary fame : a fame however, you will pardon me if I declare, I have no ambition to participate.—Happy Darcy, w'hat a contrafl is thy fwain: and he requires no (hade to raiSe his virtues. Were I to paint manly beauty in its moil pleafing form, from colonel LeSIer I would take the portrait : but he polieffes an understanding that would
give
TheTrinket, 185
give grace even to deformity; and his manners are more elegant than his per-fon. It is near the hour he appointed to be here; yet Mrs. and MiSs Darcy are not returned from their morning vifits: I will take my embroidery, and wait for them in the parlour.
Blefs the girl, did She find her beau So wry fufceptible, as to apprehend wy eyes
V
Should melt the waxen fabric ?—In the midSl of a conversation. Supported on Lefter’s fide with that grace and Spirit which gives irrefillible force to all his Sentiments, Charlotte entered; the frown on her countenance Spoke her not well Satisfied with her proxy : Ihe turned to me, and with a Scornful Smile, holding out a paper She had in her hand, “ Belvidera, Said fire, go up into my drelTing-room, there you will find pens and ink, anfwer this note, and remember I am engaged.”—He Swore the note fliould not deprive them of my com.pa-ny : but I arofe, and left them tete-a-
tete

186 The Trinket,
tete ; — lovers, I am told, find this the happieSl: Situation. — Fortunate Charlotte ! — envy’s too mean a paffion to adopt, or—let us Seek another Subject. Shall I, Lucy, fink myfelf beneath the , woman I defpife We were at the Pantheon lafi: night 5 in our train were Several agreeable men, Some vying for my notice; but colonel Lefler taught me to disregard them.—He too, I fear, will infiruO: your Belvidera in a more painful Science, whoSe rudiments, are fighs. Still this man—come then; whyimpoSe a voluntary conftraint ? Some people have efieemed an aflertion, that writing to a friend, is but thinking on paper a good apology for ill-formed, and ill-connected Sentiments : but this, I dare not offer : and I have expofed ideas to my Lucy, I other wife muSl blulh my thoughts fliould dwell on. Correct me, my charming friend : though I am Strangely altered, your reproofs will be
received wdth the fame affcdlion that
/
dictated them, and your precepts chear-
full|
The Trinket.
i§jf
Since we have been
are changed
fully embraced, in town, the Darcys too, even in their moll familiar advances, there is a certain pride that Seems to make a merit of condeScenfion : —-or is it, that discontent flamps every objedt with power to encreaSe the diSeafe* It is of little confequence unmerited favours are more painful to Support than undeferved negled'. I write in Charlotte’s dreding-room, and colonel LeS-ter is Hill below. When Oie came home, he was entertaining me with a defeription of his friend ; a man, who, he declares pofTelTes fo great a deference for his opinion, that he loves, merely from his report,—I Smiled that Elliott had configned his heart, a jewel, to receive the form his fadlor bell approved :— while Leller, en badmage, threw himfelf at my feet, and with infinite pleafantry, perfonated his friend: ah, Lucy, why will men always de-*
cetve
2
LET
a 88
T H F T R I N K E T.
LETTER XXXIIL
Sir Harry Edgetron to Edwari?'
Willis, Efq.
M’^ Willis, the conSent is granted,
and granted with an unrelu(5lant frankneSs, inexpreffibly engaging.—Tomorrow miSs Seaton becomes rr»y wife 5 her blooming beauty, the refinement of her fentiments, the purity of her heart-—ah, how grateful is mine for the invaluable' tr.eaSure.—Scarce yet nineteen, my Emma forgets, or overlooks the difference in our age; with generous candour flie declares her partiality, while I, heaven is my witnefs, W’ould part with all my wealth to place her in an eligible lituation, could I at the fame time indemnify her for accepting if,. Where then is the ufe of gold, and wherefore is it lounht with Such avidi-
O
ty, hnce we feel its value but in imparting it, and an ill-ju*^gi^^g world pre-fcribe its ufe ? Ah, Willis, why are mankind at enmity ? Though feparately
in
The Trinket. 189
in Search of happinefs, we all unite to bar it from each other. Either the lovely Seaton continues the fport of fortune, or takes fhelter in my boSom : charming alternative, could I bellow the happinefs Ihe merits. — I gaze on her with transport and regret; I view her as a vi(£lim defined to be Sacrificed j charmer, with every beauty to excite, and continue the moH ardent tenderneSs, given to a man, early callous to every
a blooming
Sentiment but friendlhip. Pleafures unmixed were not defigned the portion of inferior beings: we muft not rejeD happinefs, only becaufe it may be heightened, nor make refle<flion produdive ofdif-quiet. The rofe and thorn grow together ; and Sure it were folly to negledt the one, and feck the Iharpnefs of the other. Perhaps, Willis, I am the firlt of my fex who has repined that youth and beauty were Surrendered to his arms: but there are feelings, reafon forfeits its name in attempting to account for. The writings demanded my attendance
in
too
The Trinket.
in town laft week, and I was at youf lodgings a few hours after you fet off for K—. Mifs Seaton has not betrayed the flighted:curiolity to learn the fettlements; flattering confidence ! how defpicable the man, who would hefitate in returning it tenfold into thy bofom. -^Yes, Emma, thou art the arbitrefs of my fate^ and thy inclinations, my rule ofcondufti In compaflion to you, I would change the fubject j but my heart dill didfates, and Emma is its only theme: poor Wil-
lis, the correfpondence continuing, you are mightily to be pitied 5 for I cannot give you even the hope of an alteration ; and you, who have experienced “ How much the wife is dearer than the bridef will not wonder at the future letters of
Your
Edgerton
LET
The Trinket.
191
LETTER XXXIV.
Mr. Hervey to Augustus Sydney,
Efquire.
ARDON, dear Mr. Sydney, the anxiety of a poor old man, hill tenderly felicitous for your welfare—pardon him, if alarmed by a report that your behaviour in the moll facred of all engagements— the matrimonial tie, is not what the generous principles imbibed by nature, and (may the vanity of an aged tutor hope forgivenefs, when it leads him to add) cultivated by education, gave the moll promiling alTurance
of.
Yes, Mr. Sydney, formed to engage all hearts, and charm all eyes,” you forget that vice in you is doubly
culpable ; it is no longer ** a monller of fuch hideous mien j” virtue in another would be lefs charming — Recollect then the numbers, who, caught by the lively elegance of your manners, plunge with you into excelTes, where the guilt indeed is theirs f but the refined.
102
T H E- T R I N K E T.
cd, the fpecious polilh is only yours to give. With a genius fprightly and active, far beyond the common lot, you quit the happy fcenes of domeflic joy, which the beauty and tendernefs of lady Juliet would ever afford you j and plunge into tumult, in fearch of a felicity, which never can be yours. You feel no longer for lady Juliet, perhaps, the paffion which once actuated you—and you would love : but refleO:, Mr. Sydney, that the hours of youthSul chimeras are paft. For my part, there is nothing appears to me more aflonifli-ing than the general uSe and acceptance of a term, of which one part of the world know nothing but the found, and the other are far more indebted to the ideas a warm imagination has fuggeft-ed, than any reality ; for the fuppofed exigence of love, is the firfl fenfation ©ur School girls are told they muff guard their hearts againf;.—And a boy is ufh-cred into life, fraught v»/ith the expectation of Iliortly meeting with Some fair
Delia,
The T E 1 n k e t.
193
Delia, who is to become the mifIreSs of his Soul. Of the former, after having ran over the moft celebrated ornaments of a circulating library, we hnd the greater part dreffing out a favourite partner at her country-ball, with all the imaginary perfections of a Mande-ville, or a Sir Charles Grandifbn. While he, perhaps, incapable of the ardours llie fuggefted, or wiShing fome
more admired nymph the tribute of them, repays only the cold civility of acquaintance.—^Tired with cruelty,where her imagination had fondly framed the reverSe r fame other youth prefents himSelf, and is in his turn forgotten : at length the partner of her life, is brought to her by her parent—^fhe then diScards her paft ideas, as the romance of youth j and Seeks in the arms of frienddiip and efteem, that happinefs, which till then, feemed to her only the attendant on the Softer paffion.
IS in the vacations of School, the fictions of an Ovid, or the tender Strains
K
of
194
The Trinket.
of the Sicilian muSe, have funk into the heart of our young hero, he lits and dreams of a lady Frances, or Mifs Jenny, whom his Sifters allure him is the preftieft girl in the world—he looks at her, and perceives the rofes of her cheek rivalled only by the vermilion of her lips. Her eyes. Sparkling with innocence and gaiety, recall every idea the poets have painted of the Loves and Graces: totally a ft ranger to the refinements of Sentiment himSelf, he feels not the want of it in ladv Frances, and ima-
J	^
gines he has fixed his heart for ever. Fearful of the raillery of his companions, and too ineloquent to join the Sprightly chit-chat of his fifters, he fancies his paflion more violent, from the neceftity of confining it within his own breaft; till the parade of removal to a univerfity rouzes him from his ftupor he returns, he Sees lady Frances, but the allufion is vaniftaed.—Vanity and afSedlation have Succeeded the native SweetneSs of her manners—a round of
6
modilh
The Trinket*
195
luodllh diffipation hasbanillied the rofes
from her cheek
He then bends his
purfuit in Search of Some other objedl on whom to fix his pafiion ; and pafles his life in an ideal expedtation* that he Iliall one day meet with Some other fair, who fliall appear to him with the once fancied charms of his lady Frances.—Mi-Laken man, he Scorns a happinefs within his reacla, and would graSp a fiiadow which mull for ever flv before him. Till the difeafes of age. joined with the more Severe ones of a conilitiition brok-. en by diffioation, brings convi<flion of his folly : then, if he weds at all, he weds for fortune
or, perhaps indifferent to the yoke, he defers it till the hand of death arrefls him in an unloolc-ed for moment, and he finks to the grave with negledl 5 or if he is wept, they are the tears of joy, fired by dependents but w’hat fate mull be reServed for him, who bleft with all of cood this world can offer—Pardoirme, Mr. Sydney, I would only wifh to convince you,
K 2
that
196
«
The Trinket.
that you love lady Juliet more than any other woman—that you might be happy,——that I ftill look on you as my child—that I am
Your ever faithful
HeRveV* **
LETTER XXXV;
Augustus Sydney, Efq, to Mr
Hervey.
,<« Why what a pox ;
** Give her the h^ir.”——He Spoke, and rapp’d
his boXi,
no ware you really, my dear Mr. Hervey, ffill unconvinced that the eloquence of a Cicero himfelf ■would be infufficient to draw me from the error of my ways-—error did I fay ! no faith, let me correct the expreflion ; you injure me if you do not fuppofe me the bell hufband in the world.—I’ll give you a proof of it —-1 remember fome fuch a mufty ledlure as yours, had put a few ferious thoughts in my head, (God
knows
TheTrinket.
T97
knows how they came to travel a road they are So totally unuSed to) when being	with my wife, fitting in
an arm chair by the fire, a tooth>pick in my hand, ** Pray, my dear. Said I, looking archly enough at her, do not you think vve are an amazingly happy couple am I not an excellent huf-
band ! not that it is my cuftom to be vain of any thing —-only I am afraid, there are people in the world, not altogether convinced of it/’
“ I am convinced of it, I afTure you, Mr. Sydney, anSwered She, fmiling \ nor would I have you different from what
you are, in the minutefl trifle
but.
for heaven’s fake, how came you to think on fuch a fubject \ to fay truth, I believe it is the flrft time you was ever guilty of it.”
** Really, my dear lady Juliet—but you flatter me—I always intended to play Benedick to admiration,hnd indeed never dreamt I had not Succeeded till now actually, you are very happy Ju-
K 3	liet.
198 The T R I N K E T.
liet, are not you, prdiing her hand. “ Ah, Said She, throwing her arm round my neck, united to my charming Mr. Sydney, who could be otherwiSe -There Hervey, did I not tell you So the Sex doat on me to diflradion. Ah, one tender accent from a voice like mine, would ruin half a million of
9
them.	Hear me then—I have the ten-dereff eSleem, nay, a veneration for lady Jct iet 3 but the narrow track of conjugal felicity may fuit the fober trudge of a foul unelevated by nature, or worn down by art; but mine, brooks not
fuch bondage.-^Disappointed, but oh, how nobly, in the only point it ever fixed on with an ardor didfated by propriety -life would appear a blank, un-aduated by tumult, by noife and folly. I muf: be gay—or wretched.—Judge
then,	if you had not better leave lady Juliet a hufband, with whom her fond-nefs, her generofity lead her not to be diSfatisfied ; than one, whoSe morofe-neSs and infenlibility, would leave her
no
The Trinket.
199
no hope of future amendment. Cupid, my dear fir, having once quitted th temple of Hymen on a frolick, when he would have returned to it, found the avenues fo crowded with the votaries of Plutus, who Seemed too regardleSs of him to make way for his admifiion, that enraged he fwore an eternal enmity to that union, in vvhich he was now per-fuaded avarice had So large a part.. And taking his flight, left the dominions of love peopled by the flaves of riches.
Really a very pretty little allegory: I only told it you, though, becauSe you feem to me one of thoSe old falhioned fouls, who efteem love and marriage, the natural con Sequences of each other ; whereas, and you may take my word for it—but you are a fenSible fellow, and can never be fo confoundedly mif'-taken. — Adieu 1 believe me as much obliged to you, as you can willi me ; and as perfeidly fatisfied with my own conduD: as—I can wiSlr myfelf.
K4
LE T-
20Q
The Trink et.
LETTER XXXVI.
Sir Harry Edgerton to Edward
Willis, Efq.
N what terms, Edward, fhall I give vent to transport ? -— Melancholy may complain, and grief account its Sorrows, but gratitude is the Sole language of happineSs; and Emma's uncle finds that too poor to pay the bleffing.
On the morning that was to have made PvliSs Seaton my wife, 1 reached the cottage earlier than I had appointed, but found her already prepared to receive me. Her habit was the emblem of her condudf, confident, elegant
and unSullied; a flowing robe of the purefl: white vyed with her complexion, which that day the roSes had deSerted. Her auburn hair was faftened with the mod becoming negligence, and a bunch of flowing geraniums, which I had before presented her,
“ Blulh’d ’mid the whitenefs of her bofom j”
over them, there fell from a narrow velvet
The Trinket.
201
vet collar, a Small oval Set round with brilliants. As I had never Seen her wear any diamonds, I looked at it with Some attention, and in a pauSe of conversation, took it in my hand, with that kind of involuntary adion a man uSes whoSe thoughts are otherwise employed.—A cat had ftolen into the room during our conference, and was at this moment flying at a cage that confined a favourite bullfinch; Emma obferved it, and haS-
tily Starting from me~ to aid the little
/
warbler, the twill: that hung from her collar broke, and left the trinket in my hand:—at the inflant She twined from me, I concluding it was Still faStened, let it go, and by the violence of a fall upon a marble hearth, thefpring opened think, Willis, w'hat I felt when I be-
held the pidture of Sophia
lovely,
blooming as on the fatal day I viewed her at the altar. I endeavoured to dif-guife my emotion, and taking Emma by the hand, enquired how long (he had been miStrefs of that bauble v/ith-
Ki
out

20.2
The Trinket.
out affecting furprize at my unaccountable curiofity, file informed me, th at during her father’s lafl illnefs, he called her to his bed-fide, delivered her a key,' and pointed at the calleet to which it belonged; at the fame time gave her injunctions not to open it till after his deceafe : -— “ Emma, conti-
t-
nued the good old man, the lafl: moments of a life that hath been dedicated to thy wellfare, fhall be employed in thy fervice —1 have yet, my dear girl, a few more inftruCtions to convey, a few more truths to difclofe, ere we part for ever.—Ah, wou’d to God I might in death reftore the precious delegated charge—my Emma, you have yet a father’’
He would have proceeded, but the words died upon his lips.” — Here her tears did juftice to his memory ; then
turning: to me with inimitable fweet-
nefs, “ Sir Harry (fhe continued) your heart will befl; inform you what mine has felt,—Mifs Sydney found me furrk
m

The Trinket.
203
in Sorrow, and her kindneSs helped me to Support, though it could not to teach me to forget my loSs.—While I continued at M—, hwas full employ to range the walks where he had trod, to gaze on proSpeCts he admired, and water with my tears the flirubs he plan'tecL At A(ffon-hall far dilferent Scenes Sue-
V
ceeded;—^and tho’ I frequently repeated the words that fell from his lips, the calket ftill remained unopened r whether the contents were unvalued, or that I received delight from the consideration that I had it in my power flill to obey him, I will not determine ; but this morning, Sir, I firll unlocked it, and was Surprized to find all its con-
tent
a
trinket
and a letter
the
former you'have Seen, the latter I had not time to open, ere you arrived ** Quick, cried I, interrupting Ler, the cafket—and the letter—hafte my Em-’ She flew from me, and inftantly returned with them. The paper confirmed my hopes : it was the writing I
ma.
K 6
gave

The Trinket.
gave to Edmonds when I con the infant Emma to his care.
Figure
to yourfelf my happinefs, in recounting to the liflening wonderer the Secret of her birth, and you will agree with me
The heart can ne’er a tranSport know
That never felt a pain.



LETTER XXXVII.
Colonel Lester to Charles
El LIOTT, Efq.
^JpHAT you Sober, thinking mortals, who make a thoufand fur-mifes, inferences, and conclulions, who,, through the mere dint of perfeverance, and the having tried all things,- hit at laft upon the right; are either unufeful or infignificant beings,, can be only one of the many prejudices makind have agreed in adopting. For my party Charles, (and let me tell you I have duly weighed all reaSons pro and con) I am of opinion that conjurors, gentlemen of the conlidering cap, or, in other
words.

T h"e Trinket.
205
words, you theorifts are most ufeful members of fociety. Give you the stightest probability and you immediately fet to work chappy, indeed, when “ the white web of flowing thought’' proves more durable than the labours of Penelope.
Raillery apart; I give you joy of your amazing penetration i and in return, congratulate me on the astedlion of my Belvidera—a glorious distinction no Dioclefian would refign.
She received my addreSs with evident pleafure, a pleaSure, rendered doubly charming by the bafhful modesty that tried to check it. My new-aflumed character becomes me mightily—how Should it do otherwife ? We have heard
9
of a Paris, an Alcibiades, a Sedley—in love, Charles, men have but one language i and in the beaten track “ we kneel, implore, perfist, overcome—and leave -P-—do not however imagine the latter my refoluticn: they are, indeed, villains who Sport with the asteClions
of
\
2o6
The Trinket.
of the fair. You are, ere this,' fixed in your rural quiet, courting the Dryads of your father’s woods, or wooing
o to your
Charles ! Some
embrace
r> •
Courage,
witty fatirifts have declared this nymph infenlible as rocks, but fo great is her partiality for young men of your diSpoIition, that fwear you love, and I warrant lire will'repeat your words j I i'hall rejoice when the contradt is determined, lince that muft Surely prove a happy engagement where found and fenfe are united.
Charlotte Darcy does not Support her captive’s defertion with the floicifm her condudl promiSed ; but there are people, loth to relign polTeflions they never valued. The poor girl hates Belvidera moSt cordially } upon my foul I am Sorry to be the cauSe of their diOenfion. -— Mifs Finchley’s fituation is peculiarly difagreeable, and I am malicious enough to take pleafure in her perplexity, fince I can turn it to advantage, and from it draw arguments
for
The Trinket.
207
for the Speedy celebration of our nuptials —She bluShes at the hurrying precipitation—but blulhes, are the heralds of conSent. The country, Charles, is favourable to theMufes j try your fkill at an epithalamium, and though this feafon of the year affords no zephyrs, flowers or fracance : Pan and his ruflic tribe will
O	^
join the Song : even Ihould they prove insufficient, Olympus is at hand j and its immortal inhabitants will be eloquent in your verfe.
LETTER XXXVIIL
MiSs E MMA Edgerton to ladyEcizA
Beauclerk.
Y"OUP^ letter, my dear Eliza, is juf: brought to me \ and, 1 believe you fincerely rejoiced at my good fortune for you have wept my griefs.—It feems ffrange, that in Sorrow we fly to the pen for relief, and write with eafe and elegance; but change the proSpedt and v/e are no longer eloquent.,—I cannot
V ‘
o8
The Trinket.
not otherwise account for this, but that as misfortunes are more incident to hu-manity, our minds are heSt adapted to receive melancholy ideas, and our language to exprefs them ;
<c Q
So properly the objefls of afHiiSion, That heaven is pleafed to make diftrefs become
us.

I hate trifling prefaces, the refult of folly, or of vanity; and as I know my Eliza interested in all that concerns her friend, I will endeavour to recount in his own words.
The Hiftory of Sir Harry
Edgerton.
In the narrative I am about to difcloSe, I only bear a Second part ; I have a brother Emma, our opinions are the fame, our fouls inseparable, and our hiflory is conneded. In compaf-fion to you, I will pafs over the firll years of our lives, diflinguiflied but by variety of juvenile recreations. I was
near twenty
and Frederick eleven
months
The Trinket.
209
months younger, when our tutor was discharged.—We found ourSelves pof-felTed of unbounded happinefs, and bleft with an ability to enjoy it. We Smiled, when lovers talked of changing hearts j and could not hold ourSelves So dear, as each elfecmed the other. When Solicited to partake a favourite amuSe-ment, or join in Some gay frolic, we have retired, have fhut out pleaSure or rather found it in “ the flow of foul.’’ The warm reciprocal affedion enlarged our minds 5 and Frederick was deftined early to diScover, that friendihip prepares the heart for love. We had planned a trip to Paris, and, by chance mentioned our Scheme to a young fellow, who deSired us to take the charge of a letter addrelSed to his lifter, a penlioner in the convent de Soon after our arrival, we recolledled, and determined to execute his commif-fton—We were introduced at the grate, where ftie appeared; and ere we had anSwered a few natural interrogatories,
a lady
210
The Trinket,
a lady that had followed us into the convent enquired for her daughter,who was immediately conducted to her. I thought her formed to win the heart; but Frederick found her fo. To me file appeared charming — him She charmed. I need not tell you the acquaintance was cultivated, and our vi-fits frequently repeated—nor relate by what fleps wq learnt She was the
Who
in
daughter of monfieur de the fpace of a few months, had buried one wife, and received a Second, The former v/as'an English woman, and had by articles Secured to herfelf the privilege of educating her girls in the proteSfant religion. Sophia was her only child. She had imbibed the precepts of chrillianity from her lips; and the virtues it inculcates were rooted in her bofom. She wept over her mother’s grave, and lamented the kind tutoreSs whofe life elucidated the maxims She had enforced. The poor Sophia received her Slepmother with fub-
miflion,
The Trinket,
21 f
miffion, and through the natural fweet-neSs of her diSpoIition, anSwered frowns
with Smiles.
She had no other (liield
to ward off harlhnefs, than meeknefs and refignation, thefe ffe praOiSed j but vulgar minds mufl be awed, not Softened into virtue. The mildnefs which at firft trembles to repel, is often, by frequent infults, awakened into adtion. True humility, and that laudable foftnefs that is founded on reflection, though not eafily provoked, yet touched too far, rifes into Spirit ^ and thefe apparently oppolite qualities, are only perfedl when combined.—Sophia poffeffed them in an eminent degree She combated rigour with fubmiflion, till her religion was invaded 5 then with a firmnefs undaunted by cruelty or th reats, vowed to refign her principles
but with her life. Madame de
af-
toniflied, adopted more Soothing methods j but finding her ftill immoveable, her rage acquired encreafing ffrength from the Short fufpence. This
artful
Z12 The Trinket.
artful woman had gained the entire aS-cendency over her hufband, who faw only the objedfs to which flie pointed, and adted as fhe directed— by alienating his affection from, or otherwiSe difpofing of Sophia, fhe hoped to fecure his fortune to her daughters by a for-. mer marriage; and representing to him that from her youth, he might expect a numerous family j ffe engaged him as warmly as herfelf in a reSolution of
marrying the poor unfortunate girl to
the brother of her confeffor—Thought-lefs of the meditated mifchief, Sophia had retired to her dreffing-room, where fhe was furprifed by monfieur and ma-
dame de fon
a friar, and their deffined her parents did not allow her time to demand the reaSon of their interrupting her retirement 5 but jointly inlifted that fhe that moment abjured her faith, or received her hufband—a dreadful alternative, and each productive of the other.—Her blood congealed with horror, the powers of life were
fu Spend-
t N K E T.
213
fuSpended, and left her incapable to de«»
termine; or them to purfue their cru*
elty. They laid her upon a bed, and
when her fenSe returned, Slie found
herfelf attended but by one domeftic |
fhe fent her to feek a fmelling bottle
v/here Ihe had not laid one, and Healing
down the back Hairs, fled from the
^ /
threatened violence.-^The maid not fufpedling her intentions, but fearing that her diforder might return, haHen* ed back j and foon alarmed the family Servants were fent to feek her——unfortunately the Search proved too fuc-cefsful, they overtook the trembling Sophia, and conducted her back to her irritated parents.—^This flight was the foie handle Hie had given for malice, and

madame de
was fkilled to make the
moH of it.. A coach was immediately ordered j they conveyed her to a convent, and related an ill-connected tale, in which they declared the perverfion of her principles was the refult of a clandeHine correspondence with fome heretic of low
birthj
ai4
The Trinket.
birth, &c. Her flight corroborated thefe circumfances j the credulous ab-beSs readily believed them, and they
bribed her to Severity.
Sophia
was
defined to take the veil, and Some months of her noviciate were expired ere we beheld her : —her reafon long
V
had fliuddered at the profpeD : -— Ihe looked at Frederick and her heart re-volted. The promiSes of monfieur de — had engaged the abbeSs on their fide; my brother’s gold was now more powerful, but her indulgence extended no further than conducting Sophia to the grate. Flere he had the Satisfaction to learn he was beloVedj and when he intreated her to receive no other than the.bonds of Hymen,her tears and blufies did jufice to an afFeCtion her tongue had hefitated as eloquently to exprefs. Certain of her heart, Frederick waited on her father, represented the cruelty of confining her ; but the foie anfwer he obtained was, an affurance that necefii-ty compelled it:—he remonfrated,
and
The Trinket.
2I|
nnd after vainly uling every argument his reaSon could fuggeft, confelTed his paffion, declared his family and expectations, and intreated her hand : mon fieur de —* ftarted off his chair in rapture ; then conlidering my brother with attention, Ah qiie noiiy faid he, Shaking his head, and his features refumed their ufual aufterity : his doubts were how-ever ealily removed, and the engagement became reciprocal. Ces tnejjieurs Anglois font phis polls du monde^ faid the old man, as Frederick left him. The proSpedt of aggrandizement foftened her avaricious parents, and the next day Sophia left the convent. The lovers now converfed without reftraint, and lived but for each other. When merit is the balls of love, avarice may combat the paffion, but prudence Strengthens it.-—I knew not with what arguments to oppoSe a connexion I proved, and which indeed, from moment Sophia declared her partiality, had proceeded too far to allow an honourable
ap-
the
aiS
TiiE Trinkets*
tiourable retreat. I fometimes remind* ed Frederick we had a father; but we were both young, We judged of others by ourfelves, and both conlidered virtue the faireft patrimony, and refpedled merit as the firfl diHindfion. Little doubting our father’s conSent, we agreed to return London and to obtain it. With difficulty I prevailed on Frede* rick to continue at Paris; for (hould his confent not anfweir our demand, 1 could with greater temper liften to his objedlions, and of courfe more readily remove them. When I arrived in town, I urged my brother’s fuit ; but
4*
reafon and intreaty were alike inef-fe(5tual to prevall.*-*When I found nd probability of fucceeding> I endeavoured to laugh off the affair; to reprefent it merely a boyifh gallantry*-*! feared he Should command him to think no moreof it;*—but SirWilliam, in whofe creed faith in females was not inSerted^ and in whofe practice conffancy had no place, himfelf aided the deception :
8
>• A
he
/
The Trinket.
217
he appeared Satisfied his Sons fliould tread in his path, and make the fair fubServient to their amuSenient: at bell.
the charmers of a leiSure hour.
I
wrote to Frederick, declaring the unSuccefsful embafiy, and adviSed him to wait till a more fortunate moment might reconcile his love and duty ; but he, joining with the moraliSfs who teach us to Seize the prefent, thought it the bell time to Secure his honour and his Sophia. He acquainted me with his intentions, and I reached Paris the morning She had put on her bridal ornaments.—An intimate friend was her only attendant—Louifa Clairvill was Seldom the handSorneSl woman in an afiembly j but in her preSence beauty appeared a trifling: diftindion. She
had no pretenfion to wit, but her Sentiments were refined, and her language elegantly adapted to expreSs them. Her mirth was free from levity, and her SeriouSneSs flranger to melancholy. She was without vanity; yet having
L	learnt

The Trinket.
learnt and praDiSed the virtues of her fex, file knew to make them valued.
A native grace diftinguifhed all her actions ; and her fweet diSpolition, like the enlivening funfhine, dilFufed Serenity and chearfulneSs.
You have hitherto, iny Emma, beheld us happy ; or Senlible of.no other Sorrow than the lover’s pleafing pain : but we can exclaim with Rouffeau : Mankind are all horn tributary to ill fortune j and the happied: are thcfe who have paid their debts the earlied.” Sir Harry areSe, he left the room 5 bu.t Soon returning, reSumed his tale.
“ Sophia and Louifa were companions in infancy; and in riper years, their affeDion realized whatever poets Sing of friendlhip.—In the former my brother found bis happinefs complete; virtue ffrengthened affe6Hon, and Hymen rivetted the bonds of love. —To afcertain this happinefs, I liad perhaps deviated from diferetion ; and the man who in his friend’s concern is negligent,
yet
‘r>
r.,7


The Trinket.
219
yet prudent for himSelf, is defervedly branded with contempt. But not to detrad: from the moft meritorious action of my life, let us give this apparent prudence an epithet more fuitable : I determined to make myfelf the facri-fice of filial obedience, and to reftore Frederick to Sir William’s favour:
V
this resolution I adopted at a. time when LouiSa’s charms inftru6ted me in the difficulty of maintaining it. No anguiSh can equal his> who finds hini-felf beloved by a woman of merit, yet
; an anguhli
cannot affi her hand; doubled, when by fo doing, he might enoble the objedt he approves. Louifa’s heart, as refined as her manners, was, like them, unaccuffomed to conflraint: and reSped:, friendship, oraffedled cold-nefs, were too flight to veil my Sentiments. Some months continued thus j the principle that firfl pointed out my condudt, taught me to perfiff but Louifa had no interior obstinacy that
La
CO u 1 d
220	TTTENr R I N K E T.
could help her to fuStain it — She drooped beneath the confiidl, which
“ Like a worm in the bud
Prey’d on her damafk cheek.”
The flattering change was alarming: reaSon alTured me it was ill-placed au-fferity, when innocence became a Sufferer j and her flightell concurrence is, in our imagination, Sufficient to conSe-crate the emotions of the heart. Mine represented the folly of declining offered happineSs, led evil Should be the re-Sult : in this war of the paffions, the doubtful conquefl: was confirmed by an unforeseen event. — I found* my Self one evening alone with LouiSa at my brother’s lodgings: we were expatiating on their hanpineSs—I Snatched her hand I prefl'ed it to my lips ; love w'as the language of my eyes, and my to ngue would have given utterance to love : but an unuSual outcry upon the flairs, with the name of Henry frequently repeated, reflored me to my Self:—I ran to the door, where the firfl ol jed: that
presented
L
C'
The Trinket.
221
presented itSelf was my father ; I would have embraced him, but he turned from me with difdain. At this time. Mr. and Mrs. Edgerton, who had Spent the afternoon with' Sophia’s mother, returned j they entered the room with their uSual SprightlineSs, and Frederick had opened his mouth, the Smile of good-humour on his countenance,when
I
Sir William’s voice fixed him the Ila-tue of Surprize.
I have introduced you Emma, into a
Scene of conSufion
a Scene
it would
be difficult to deScribe : Suffice it, that W’hat we could offer, was too trifling to Soften him that evening ; and all our endeavours proved ever after insufficient.—Through his inflexibility, Frederick was reduced to See his Sophia want many comforts he languished to beffow As monfleur de — enjoyed but a Small patrimony, he had nothing to ive his daughter; and on Sir William’s remittances, though augmented to the iitmofl of my power, they were
L
3
unable
222
The Trinket

unable to live. In this diffrefs a flattering profpedl offeredjwhich his friends earnefUy intreated Frederick to embrace; immenfe fortunes were daily brought from the Eall Indies; and the fituation they wiihed him to accept, w'as peculiarly advantageous.
h
0
pe
The
that he fiiould be foon able to
p>lace his Sophia in the Sphere where the was born to Ihine, induced him to confent.——The morning he was to quit us arrived —we parted, and felt the parting, as brothers, and as friends.
He approached his wife, pale, and'al-inoft frantic with diffrefs, he Strained her to his heart r “ My beff Edgerton, Said the beauteous comforter, reprefs your grief; misfortunes will either ceafe to purfue us, or the time arrive when we Shall triumph in them.”-—More She intended to have faid, but the gufhing tears prevented utterance, and when She would Have blamed his Sorrow, She yielded to her own. Her adoring huf-band clafped her SUll clofer to' his bo-
fotn
%
\

The Trinket.
\
4
fom ; then putting her hand in mine> with a look more forcible than language recommended her to my care, and left us with precipitation, as doubtful if he could yet maintain the conqueSl.—Sophia Supported this unforefeen event with the heroifm that peculiarly diftin-guidred her. As the partner of his heart, fhe felt the feparation, yet bore it without repining.— She wept his ab-fence, yet trufled Providence would re-ffore the bleffing that had been refign-ed with fubmiffion. She informed me of a circumftance (be had concealed from my brother j and which difclofed, muff have augmented the pangs of parting. Certain, fhe deferved his love, fire had no apprehenlions abfence could weaken it; and difdained to urge a title, which, tho’ it might fix her deeper in bis heart, muft fubjedt him to num-berleSs inquietudes.-—She anticipated the pleafure of prefenting him a blooming prattler; of fliaring with him the
Lou i fa
delightful talk of education.
L.

24
The T r I n k et.
was conftantly with her, and with inli-nite regret I left thefe charming companions,
KJ 1 1
William’s appetite and fpirits daily declined, and the phySicians
recommended
change
of air.—As if
happinefs and health were, local, we fondly imagine thofe places that once afforded. Hill have tliem in referve : My father in his youth had fpent much agreeable time in Italy, and determined again to vifit it.—I accompanied him, but not finding that part of the world more enlivenine than the climate he
O
had quitted, we returned long before the appointed time.
Soon after oiir arrival, under pretence of vifiting a friend in the country, I left Sir William ; but Paris was my defiin-ed route.—When I entered Mrs. Ed-gerton’s houfe, Louifa came to me, her eyes red with weeping : “ My Sophia’^ was all Ihe could diftinctly utter, and claSping her hands, Hie funk upon a couch.—-Alas! I learnt her friends valuable life was defpaired of-—they informed
The Trinket.
22C
formed her of my arrival, and fhe wcl
corned me with rapture : our interview was inexpreflibly moving j the phyfi-cians entreated (he would fuffer me to leave the room, but (lie condemned their cruelty : “ Edgerton, (he continued, it has been my ultimate with to leave my Frederick Some traces of his Sophia. Vainly I hoped to have embraced my hufband > but this infant will lifp his welcome here—While I wait his entrance to thofe realms of reft, where cruelty can never enter, or forrow part
The fmile of tranfport brightened her countenance, (he consigned her little innocent to my care, and her pure Spirit fled to the abodes of bliSs.—Louifa was too young to receive the precious charge; and to an honed: pair whofe care and ability we were convinced was equal to the undertaking, I intruded it.—That the worthy Edmonds had the greateft affe(5tic>n for Frederick and myfelf, I was before convinced.—-Soon after thefe affairs w'erc
us more.
L
fettled
Cl
4'
4
2z6
The Trinket.

fettled, I received a mandate to attend Sir William, and I reached him juft
time enough to receive his laft blefiing. The profpe(ft of the fortune I ftiould inherit gave me fatisfadion,when Icon-fidered I Ihould Ihare it with my Loui-fa, and join with her to educate the infant Emma. —Alas I how diftant arc our wishes, when poflcfted from affording the happinefs we fondly imagined their accomplilhment would convey. Immediately on my return to Paris, I called on Edmonds, but he had left his habitation, and his friends were ignorant whither he had repaired.—A fer-vant who had lived with him gave me a note, his mafter had ordered him to deliver, in Viihich he informed me that necefiity had compelled him to quit Paris j but that his lovely charge ffiould find in him a father, till the time when he muff: reftore her to her real parent, or yield her to my care j that he hoped he Should be able to return, or that his fituation would be foon fettled, when
he
T fir r Tr i n k e t.
22 J
he would throw himfelf at the feet of his benefadtor.—LouiSa was Tome miles
from Paris, at the Chateau de —-; on perufing. this note, (he joined in regretting his departure.—It was now I openly avowed my love, and enforced the merit of the long attachment with every argument affedion could infpire. The bluSh of modeft tenderneSs crim-
Idned her - glowing cheek j hut wais^ (Quickly fucceeded by a death-like pale-nefs—a palenefs that long had Tit upon* her face.—Whenever 1 renewed my fuit, (lie Smiled, and railed her eyes io heaven, My dear Sir Harry, ceafe I I entreat you.—I could once have re-, figned the world without a figh —but while I liften to you, life alSumes new charms.”
“ Yes, mv Louifa, our hour& fliall be diverfified by varied happinefs.” Alas ! a fatal consumption dafhed my hopes, and the fun that was to have be-flowed her hand, witneiTed the fad re-
I felt all the anguifli of a lover
^ .
verfe

t
228
The T rinket.
torn from the object he adored > and had funk beneath my forrow, but that the little Emma, now the foie object of my care, inceffantly prefented herSelf to my remembrance—robbed of Loui-fa, Frederick, and Sophia, I loved them all in you.
But misfortune {fill purfued me, I received a letter from Edmonds, dif-clohng his reafon for leaving Paris j he was falfely accuSed of having joined in fomc papers deemed treafonous, and found it necelTarv to Secrete himfelf he informed me that he had retired to Soiflbns, and that he would there wait my commands—I Set out immediately, but on my ariival, I learnt (from his only confidant) that his retreat had been discovered, and that he had been obliged to quit Soiffons the day before.
By Erange fatality, tho’ each endeavouring to find the other, we never
met: nor was this unfuccefsful Search,
1
my only caufe of forrow ; no letters from Frederick had reached me, and
all
T h’e Trinket.
229
all enquiries after him proved unfatis-fadory.—The felicity I now enjoy in recovering my charming niece, is moderated by the apprehenlion her father never will partake it.”
When we are mod: fortunate, my Eliza, there is dill a fomething wanting
if th
e
to render happinefs complete : idea difpleafes you, we will forget it. I hate thofe gloomy mortals, whom Pope defcribes, as
“ Pleafed with nothing, if not bleft with all;’*
but in the prefent caufe, me-thinks the Sentiment it Springs from, fandtifics the murmur. Lad week my uncle conduced me to his houfe, he feparately introduced his Servants, and ordered them to acknow-ledge their midrefs.—The manlion is charmingly dtuated on the Summit of a hill—his grounds are bounded by a winding river, that Sometimes lofes it-felf among the trees, at others, falls in natural cafcades—from the window we See the cattle grazing on the didant
meadows
230
The Trinket
meadows—the myrtle, the orange, the holly, and a variety of beautiful evergreens, render even this feafon of the year delightful. — I conlider mySelf, Eliza, doubly indebted to Providence, who by fuffering me in adverSity to learn the value of affluence, taught me to enjoy, what, in the time his wifdom appointed, he bellowed. It was with regret I liftened to my uncle, when he propofed our fpending a few weeks at Bath, for I confeSs I hoped to have
palTed the winter here. To make others happy is our bell tribute of gratitude ; and their landlord’s prefence would have enlivened his chearful tenants.—Sir Harry fludies my wilhes j but when we are certain our delires will be complied with, it is not eafy to expreSs them.—The beginning of next month is fixed for our journey, and immediately after our arrival you fflall' hear from your affectionate
Emma;
The Trinket,
2^1
letter XXXIX. '
Mifs Charlotte Darcy to MiSs
Arabela Owen,
H, Arabella, I can fupport it no longer;—not that I have myfelf the leaft regard for the man ; but that that ugly creature ihould triumph over me is intolerable!—This inflant colonel Lefter’s fervant brought a letter ad-drelTed to her, and as the was not in the way, I e’en made free with the contents. Love and rapture were the foie ideas it conveyed to her, rage and revenge to me.—Next ThurSday is fixed for the completion of his happinefs; but if indignation, addrefs, and ingenuity have power, their union never lhall be accomplished.—Arabella, I die with envy — to be deferted for Belve-dera Finchley 1—but I fhall let him fee that Charlotte Darcy does not fo ealily refign her power.
Did you ever fee the creature ?—No, I believe not, or you would hardly
credit
232
The Trinket.
credit the account I fend you.*^I cannot conceive what firft induced my mother to receive her in the family? but
She is fo
mighty
compalTionate
fo
foolilhly charitable—upon my word I have no patience with her.—Belvidera too, found out her foible, and made her court to her by adopting it, and through Patty Harlowe’s affair was vaftly in favour with the old lady.—I always told Mrs. Darcy She was an artful huffy, but’ fhe was fo biggoted to her own opinions—though to be fure, no one would have imagined the girl had at-tradlions to engage a man of fafliion an aukward. thing, who but for my mother’s ridiculous generofity, had never been initiated into polite life and who ftill (wanting fenfe to adopt my example) retains all the fimplicity of the nurfery. I am really aftoniflied at colonel Lefter’s folly — the wretch ! after having feen me, to take notice of Belvidera !——Oh for vengeance, worthy of
Charlotte Darcy.
The Trinket.
233
LETTER XL.
MiSs Edgerton to Lady Eliza
Beauclerk.
Path —Monday. pardon, my dear lady Eliza, mufl be a free gift, forlarn alhamed to plead forlit—three weeks at Bath ! ah, chide me, my fweet friend puniHi mein any other manner than hyyour fi-lence, and I will kifs the rod.—Already is your Emma tired of this brilliant circle, where vanity ufurps the name of emulation, extravagance is honoured as generofity, and diffipation wears the malic of pleafure—and to many others I am convinced it is equally irkfome; but fearing to diflentfrom opinion they fee fupported by all around them, they feign amufement w'here they never received it, and firengthen the delulion.
A fine lady, firft makes a facrifice of her tafte j her heart and underflanding follow, till the whole woman is en-grolfed by fafhion.—In their idea there
IS
234
The Trinket.
is nothing fo dreadful as lingularity 5 no matter why, but if Mrs. Such-a-one has opinions of her own, that is, if (lie drelTes, viiits or retires as inclination or prudence diredf, die is immediately an ill-bred creature, brought up and intruded by nobody knows who and true enough, for her guides, to them are utter flrangers — reafon and refledion.
In the various changes of my life, I have learnt to ditinguidi flattery from kindnefs ; and the mere exercife of the tongue, from the language of the heart. My honeftruflics were flrangers to pro-fcfllon, but I confided in their friendship, and was not deceived. -—Here praife, vows, and adulation are incef-fantly aimed at my heart j but they are too impotent to reach it: — from the men (with whom the difficulty of at-tainmentflamps the value of a conquefl) we have learnt to fcorn an eafy prize. They have Somewhere heard that practice is necefSary to attain perfection

The Trinket,
235
my Emma, fhall women be found paf-five while they gain experience at our expence, and every coxcomb publishes
his “Art of Love.

But I will intro-
r
duce you to my admirers—and firft,
“ My lord advances with majeftic mien,
Smit with the mighty pleafure to be Seen.*’
Let him comeforward, and declare him-
N
Self a being perpetually bulled in dif-covering the defers of his acquaintance 5 one of thofe moralifts who view every objed: on the dark fide, and he thinks others incapable of great adions, becaufe he is always employed in trifles.
Mr. L— is falfely Ay led “a man of pleafure S’ he has found the defpicable art of debafing the moA extenflve genius, of Aripping fprightlinefs of allurement, and wit of admiration j most admirably fkilled to “ puzzle right, and varnifh wrong,” the abilities he pofTeffes, but Shew us what he wants, while lively parts, and a fertile imagination, render more confpicuous the depravity of his heart.
I re-
236 T HE Trinket.
I retired into my cloSef, and dedicated the morning to my friend s—hut they knock at my door — they force me to accompany them to the pump-room yet, this they tell me is the place where all purfue their own inclinations. In the world, Eliza, it is necelfary to follow the multitude, though it Ihould be fometimes to do evil ; and thofe are
I	^
ever happieft, who with the greateft facility can regulate their defires by the caprice of others.
Stuefday.
This morning Sir Harry obligingly accompanied me in an airing, that I might take a view of the country.—A few miles from Bath an elegant phaeton palled us with the utmofl; velocity, and one of the horfes taking fright, overturned it : — my uncle Slopped our poftillion, and ordered the fervants to give their affiftance ; himfelf alighted from the carriage and followed them. I was happy to learn at his return, that
thoug h
The Trinket.
237
though a lady in the phaeton was much frightened, no hurt had been received ; and yet Sir Harry appeared thoughtful and melancholy.—At dinner we had a large company j though he entertained his guells with his ufual politenefs, I could difeern he whUred them abfent.^—As foon as they were gone, he called for his hat :—and I flew to communicate this firange intelligence.—I fear, Eliza, they have not difclofed the truth ; yet the fervants affured me there was no mifehief, and though they did not know to whom the carriage belonged, their maffer and the gentleman in it feemed perfectly acquainted. — When I enquired the name. Sir Harry avoided a diredl an-fwer.—How unaccountable this myf-
but he comes, and will furely
I
tery
Satisfy the curioSity he has raiSed.
Still in the dark, Eliza, and returned with no other knowledge, than a con-vidion that it is impoffible to renew a
fubjedt
r
238 T H E T R I N K E T.
t
fubject which gives pain to thofe whom we regard.—Sir Harry is ftrangely in-terefted, and who, more proper for a confidant than his grateful niece—Ah, then, does he doubt the prudence or the affection of his
\
Emma.
letter XLl.
Sir Harry Edgerton to Edward
Willis, ESq.
OUR letter, Willis, arrived too late—the day before I received it, Sydney paffed us on the road —the morning was delightful, and whiling to enjoy it in its utmoft perfection, lady Juliet had defired to accompany him in the phaeton.—Unfortunately theffeeds had no lefs Spirit than their maffer, and overturned the carriage. They continued, however, their route to Bath, and I determined to keep Emma ignorant of his'preSence, and to feign fome.caufe that fliould enforce our return to H
I for-


The Trinket.
239
w i fe
carriage occaSioned
I forbore mentioning the fubjeD: till I had called on Sydney.—Heavens, how awful! how unexpected the intelligence I then received j Auguftus has loft his
the fright by bringing on a mif-
her deceafe—My friend is inexpreffibly afFeCted, his fen-fibility can be equalled only by his vivacity.—Amiable Sydney—how infinitely the feelings of the hitjband adorn the man.—Lady Amelia and Fanny arrived here yefterday; they join his for-rows : ah, Willis, in multiplying thefe Iweet connections, we but open new inlets to raiSery,

4
To me my fair one, in the blifsful band.
Of Hymen, never gave her hand ;
The joys of wedded love wt're never mine.’^
And yet, my heart has bled j it has fuftained the pangs of Separation j and in contemplating Sydney’s loSs, 1 but renew my griefs.—Adieu, Willis, by communicating thefe melancholy ideas, I (hall infect you with the contagious
fadnefs.
%
Er>GERT0N.

240
The Trinket.
LETTER XLIL
MiSs Charlotte Darcy to MiSs
Arabella Owen.
flow eafily theSe men are made our
dupes—here has been the colonel raving againft women, who he fwears afFedt the Semblance of every virtue, only to laugh at the honeft credulity that confides in them.—Ha ! ha ! ha ! you mufi own, Charlotte Darcy a divine projedor, when even the difcernirtg Lefier can be impoSed on—the man is this infiant gone from my drefling room, his face lengthened half a yard beyond its ufual dimenfions, and (liaking his wife noddle, as if ambitious to imitate the mandarins on my chimney-piece. Ob, you was never wiinefs to a Scene So diverting, and your Charlotte ad:s the Sympathizing friend to perfection. Deluded fool ! who but himSelf would
be So deceived.
Punctual as lovers
to the moment Sworn,” he reached our
houSe I
T H K T R I N K E T
■241
1'iOuSe j tript up hairs with more than
common agility.

Not quite So faff
Sir,” and I contrived prettily enough, to meet him on the landing place
the
man appeared a little diSconcerted confcious guilt flew in his face : Ah, friend, thought I, a feal is no bar to curiolity—pretending, however, per-fefl ignorance of his reafon for this early vilit, 1 Shewed him into a room begged him to be feated, and tallied of a thoufand indifferent things.—^Belvi-dera was frequently on his tongue, and
when at laft he enquired for her, I rofe
✓
and rang the bell.-—Molly, will you inform MiSs Finchley, colonel Lefter requehs her company.”—^She obeyed, but returned Soon after—Mifs was not in her apartment 1 and the footman favr her get into a hack between fix and fe-ven in the morning.—My fwain fat upon thorns, one minute he was at the window ; the next, rubbing his hands by the fire-flide—^Sfill expecting his fair
M
one s
242
The Trinket.
one’s return—one hour followed another. It muft be acknowledged, (thought I, as he paced up and dov/n the room) the creature has Some odd, becoming graces.”—He threatened to follow her—to be Sure Some wicked ra-vilher had robbed him of his treafure : I contrived, however, by talking of her, to detain him till it was too late to put this fcheme in execution ; and tomorrow the colonel is to commence knight-errant.
My mother puts on her fpedlacles, looks in Leder’s face mod compadi-
onately—pities him of courfe.
“ My
dear, colonel Leder, fays die, holding out her hand with authority, we mud learn to fupport theSe unforefeen disap-
pointments

Ah, madam, he re-
plies, 1 had differed my thoughts to dwell without redraint on future hao-
I
pineSs ; that happinefs which Mifs Finchley was to have communicated and received : but die has dcfei ted me
in
6

1 H E Trinket.
243
in the moment when Ilie (liould have bldf my wimes.—Can the lovely Belvi-dera then, pradice the deceit to which die is a ftranger ^ fed of her fex be falSe
Can the mod per-
I endeavoured to conSole him> “ Amiable MiSs .Darcy, cried he, how kind this friendly fo-licitude •, the dear girl' had many admirers, whoSe pride, more powerful than their love, revolted at the idea of receiving her as a wife ; and who may have adopted this method of terrifying the beauty they could not feduc
to
the
thought, continued he, is agony j Ob, MiSs Darcy, I idy to Seek my Belvidera.’* «« Pqj. heavens lake, colonel Lefler, defer your refolutionj it would now be
you could commence your
ere
dark
b
tearch : MiSs Finchley indeed, feldoin went out without informinfi: us, but we
O ^
had no right to demand an account of her aflions; and as we had formed no particular plan of amuSement for the
M 2
aav
244
The Trinket.
day, fhe perhaps feized it, to vilit her friends.”
My mother agreed with me, but the colonel had reaSons, (with which,thanks to my ingenuity, I was acquainted) for fuppoling otherwiSe^—however I was fuccefsful in detaining him; and now, Arabella, if you have not SenSe to divine
my fcheme, you hardly deferve confidence of
the
Charlotte Darcy.
LETTER XLIIL MiSs Edgerton to Lady Eliza
A
Beauclerk.
H, Eliza, I have Seen that once animated countenance overSpread with melancholy—thofe Sparkling eyes, dropping the tear of fenSibility——they perfuade him to take a fliort tour to diffipate his melancholy, but he fighs
and
The TRiNkET.
245
and fixes his eyes upon your Emma. This morning I have received the following billet.
Yes, madam, in compliance with my friends, I Seek variety : but plea-fure—but happihefs, can be found only in my Emma.—Your beauty, Mifs Ed-gerton, mufl: juftify the man who dif-dains fubmifiion to common forms, that have power over us, only becaufe they are eftablifhed,—I quit the woman I adore, I leave her furrounded by admirers, and can I do otherwife than apprehend, that long before propriety will admit mv claim, her hand fhould be
j	*
difpoSed of.—The envious talk loudly of my gaiety j but they will ever. Satirize, Vv-hat they cannot imitate—however, I fee my errors ; and I dare ac knowledge them—may I flatter mySelf, my lovely Emma will reward thoSe virtues, and that conftancy flie has inSpir-ed; that flie will one day blefs her
Sydney.
M 3
Sir
2a6
T II E T R I N K E T.
Sir Harry hung upon my chair while I read it—the fervant waited, and implements for writing v/ere on the table,,! took up a pen, and on the cover of his billet, I wrote thefe lines.
“ My happinefs depends upon your
but remember, Mr.
goA
conduct
Sydney, he that alpires to my heart mufc merit it j and that I never will lilfeii to the lover^ v?hen I cannot approve the manP Something far different I fliould have Said j but when the the pen is not retrained by ceremony, it will exj)refs our thoughts—I would have torn it, but my uncle prevented me.—How long, fald he, has it been, cuftomary' with my Emma, to treat her friends with referve—-and is not
I
But
Mr. Sydney among the number. bluShed, and Sealed the paper, furely, my Eliza, he muR be convinced of my affedion j and his apprehenlions of my inconstancy are impertinent. I have discernment to guide my choice ;
T H E T R I N K E T.
247
and refolutiop to perfillin it.—Sevigny, who came here with lady Amelia, accompanies his friend : they leave Bath to-morrow, and, Mr. Sydney propofes waiting on lady Juliet’s relations in London, and then begins his tour.
Ah, my friend, in this fituation it is al-moft guilty to think on future happi-nefs—poor lady Juliet—the more I anticipate felicity, the fafter flow my tears for you.



LETTER LXIV.
Mifs Charlotte Darcy to MiSs
Arabella Owen.
TX^ELL, it mufl: be confefled, even a
Machiavel mull bow to my fu-perior abilities.—Afflidfions, my dear, teach thefe men humility : and Lefter
is mightily improved through my in-
%
flrudlions—fo civil, fo condeScending ;

‘ My dear Mifs Darcy.”
M4

My amiable

The Trink et.
th e ti ‘ he

De
able Charlotte.” Ha ! ha! ha !
So enraged againft Belvidera : gazed cn her, and rnilloak art for ten dernefs—hypocriSy for candour luded fool !—Oh, Arabella, this vengeance is divine. H e was here early^ and had ordered his horfes to meet him j hut againft that I had provided, fear, MiSs Darcy, (faid he, looking at his watch) my Servant has mifunder-flood me.”'—^Juft as he uttered thefe words, my chaife came to the door.
** Colonel Lefter, cried I, my mother will be d’ov/n in a few minutes ; I was going to call on a friend of mifs Finch-
ley’s
few
from lowHo—you

will excufe me fir.
Give me leave to accompany^ you: we wdll leave a mefiTuage, that when my Servant arrives he may follow us with the horfes.”
I pretended mySelf averfe to the pro-pofal, but objedled in a manner that Ilrengthened his refolution. —Yes,
thought
The Trinket.
249
thought I, as he handed- me to the chariot i if I am now fucceSsful, Arabella Owen will do juftice to my abilities.
I took care in our ride to- drop fome hints of a prior attachment, of another lover, once encouraged by Belvidera ;
he fwallowed the bait;
Ci
Ah, mifs
Darcy, though your generous friendship would conceal her falsehood, I fear I am indeed deceived.—-Poor Leftef, you was a true prophet; and yet the chej' Lreuvre was in re Serve.
Some miles beyond the bridge a poll-chaife palTed us—Heavens, ’tis my Belvidera! exclaimed the colonel
cruel
dilTembling girl
but I will tear then looking out
her from his arms’’ of the window, he called to the poftil-lions to flop j but they had received di-reDions ; I had likewife appointed the time when Belvidera’s deliverer Ihould convey her from her country reiidence, and had ordered my Servant to ride be-
for him to commence
as a ficnal
M 5
250
the lover
The Trinket.
and the girl I was aflured would be too fenlible of his Quixotifin, to refufe lillening to his profeffions : the plan fucceeded as I wiflied, my fpark fat by her fide, one arm thrown carelefsly round her, while with the other he raifed her hand to his lips : flie endeavoured to difengage herfelf; but Leffer thought her reluctance proceeded folely from our meeting:
“ Let us return, mifs Darcy, he ex-claimed, our fearch has proved indeed fuccefsful I it Shall inffruCt me to tear her from my heart.”
The poor colonel rails ’at women with inceivable grace ; ah, without doubt he is valtly indebted to your Charlotte, and but for her, had wanted an opportunity of exerting all his talents.
LET-
The Trinket.
251
LETTER XLV.
From the fame to the fame.
ND fo really, Arabella, you are at a lofs to discover how I have executed my Scheme—wonderful!—but you was never remarkable for penetration—how then (liould you comprehend the charming projedt ?—On the day fixed for the wedding, I rofe witb the fun, and entered Belvidera’s cham-
ber :

My dear nufs Finchley, ciied I,
I have an engagement for the day Lady Lucy Aubrey deligns to call on me at ten o’clock, and 1 want exceedingly to purchafe a few trifles at the nearefl miilener’s.-—A coach is at the-door, and we iliall be back before Mrs. Darcy is ready for breakfaff-—will you^
accom!
ny m
e ?
She agreed without hefitat .in—in the appointed flreet we
God
me, Belvidera !	1 exclaimed,
there’s
palled the hero of the piece \
M 6
•>
2C2
The Trinket.
there’s Mr.
Eldridge
a relation of
ours, juft come to London.”—He faw me, ftopped the coach, and at my repeated requeft,, agreed to return with us to breaftfaft.—At length we reached the (hop-—it was too late y 1 could not think of detaining my friends, and, ftepping out, delired the coach might turn, and I would be with them in-ftantly :—the driver fat off with amazing rapidity j and my fwalm, fearing, his fair charge Should be alarmed, to conceal her danger, drew up the wooden blinds.—Mifs, I fuppofe had more discernment than he v/ilhed ; and more resolution too^ however, by Securing her hands,, and ftifling her voice with his handkerchief, he made ftiift to con-duff her to her country lodging. Here the girl affumed the heroine, and was
fo perfect in her part, the women of the hoiiSe, though accuftomed to Such visitors, were Softened.-—The next day, her kind ftars Sent Some valorous knight
to
T H E T R I N K E T;
to her relief—the fair damSel was discovered weeping at her window—and beauty in dillreSs you know, Arabellai !§■ irreliftible—to fee, and love, were fynonymous.—Ob, I can alTure you^ Harry adts the adoring inamorato to perfection—how fhould it be other-wife for when I gave him inftruCtions for his conduct, “ There now. Said L
look
on
my
face
recollect the. Soft
things Such beauty Should infpire, and repeat them all to Belvidera—but be
fure, continued I, that the whole time
you converfe with her, you figure to yoLirfelf mifs Darcy is before you that it is her you Speak toi and then believe me, friend, Such charms will make you eloquent.’’—Well, this Sue-? ceeded—^the. duenna’s contrived to bc' mofi; accidentally out of the way j a pofichaiSe was ready, and the prettyr fool, all gratitude to her generous deliverer, jumped into it.—In the mean time,. Charlotte Darcy was not unem-
ployed.
^54
The Trinket
ployed, but brought the colonel to the field of adion —-he was however foon
and we returned to Bruton-
w
flreet, where I alighted ; he, I kne widied for privacy, that he might indulge his grief, and I ordered the chariot to convey him home.
A few minutes after, Belvidera reached the door——** Tremble, mifs Finchley, cried I, for you can no longer impofe on us :—my mother and colonel Leffer are undeceived nor fhall an abandoned hypocrite find fhelter here.
Ah, mifs Darcy, She replied, before whom then Should the guiitlels tremble } Colonel LeSler will be one day convinced of my innocence — till then, I know it-—-and am content.

€i

She left me with difdain; and where
for
the girl now is, heaven knows ^ after her flight (which I had taken care fhould be pretty public) it was impof-fible, you know, that we Sliould receive her.—Well, Arabella ! in future times,
when
\
The Trinket.
when men Iliall dwell with praife on inftances of addre/s and ingenuity, thiS' ihall be produced, and the world con-fefs it was done by
Charlotte. Darcy-^
LETTER XLVI.
Eliza Beauclerk to
Edgerton.
Mifs.
"^^ELL, it mull; be confelTed, Mr.
Beauclerk can vie even with Pe-truchio in the taming of his Shrew. Still mull I date my letters from this* dreary Spot, where your friend is a very Laplander in Supporting the rigours of the feaSon.—Heigh-ho, Emma! we give thefe lords of the creation So much reafon to depend upon our integrity, they think a double claim to our allegiance unnccedary ^ and when once obedience becomes a duty, give themSelveS' little trouble to fecure our inclinations
ah.
/

The T r I n k e t.
ah, my friend, I have ffill Wronger reaSons ^—but matrimonial disagreements Should never be difcloSed y and a hufband’s unkindnefs,. is then only
In
comitants of marriage.
juft, when vve dare complain of it. my conscience, I believe Some uneaft--neffes are thrown in with the prielLs benedidion, and in honour to the reverend father they continue the con-
Here then am I, buried in this defart place, my days foiely diverlifted by rain or haili impending clouds or falling. Snows while my Emma, unconfcious of the lowering feafon, meafures her hours by triumphs;, and having. Subjected all hearts to her Sway, like;the brave Macedonian youth, who wanted worlds to conquer, She weeps for Subjects to en-ilave.—Surrounded by theSe numerous* admirers, eftabliftr it early in your mind, that fallhood lurks beneath pro-feftion ; nor yield to any other than the-cojuitlbip of the heart. I received your
lettcrsjj.
The Trinket.
2'57'
letters; and (?veii from your firfi: introduction, have been charmed with Sir Harry Edgerton—how great muff be the merit of that man, whom the diftinc-tion of being my Emma’s uncle, cannot raife higher in my efteern, — Poor Louifa! I felt more for her, than for the equally unfortunate Sophia :—our own lituation too, often regulates our
pity
and for the pathetic.
€i
each
man’s fecret Standard’s in his mind ‘‘ She never told, her love,” but felt a victim to maiden pride as, the taper near extinct burns
redoubled
brightnefshappinefs illumined her lafl: days,, and flamed but to expire.—Pardon,, Emma, if thefe melancholy reflections intrude upon the jovial hour.
indeed I am this morning a,very uiir fit correfpondent ; unlefs, as a monarch in the midSt of triumphs was daily in^ formed that he was mortal, you wiSh a fmment.Q morii and for that office, believe
2c8
The Trinket.

lieve me, no candidate will offer more Suitable than your
Eliza Beauclerk^

ETTER XLVIL
Augustus Sydney, Efqj to Sir
George Danvers.
Parts.
o«.' certainly a Second Cervantes will
rife to record the achievements of the heroic Sydney—-or the valorous knight of the woeful countenance damSels refcued — plots discovered ha! ha! h a ! etttre nous George, the fpinfters at Bath were vaftly outre in ad-vifing me to Seek variety in foreign courts—-a genius like mine never could want amuSement — beSides, it is absolute cruelty to leave the country where one can be fo Serviceable—-to leave the
women, ‘‘ like lilies drooping

ah,
my
i

T HE Ti^INKET.
my fair ones, well may ye mourn, Sydney’s gone,
“ And pleaSure is no more.”^
Hey, Danvers! gone to fire another Troy.—Sevigny looks over my llioul-der: “ What, Auguftus ! ffill in the old flraiii V*
** Why faith, Lucius, I believe I did refolve to recount our quixotifm—but; (yawning) prithee, take the pen ihy-felf.”
He immediately made off j and not without realbn friend, thought I, for really the fubject requires my animated stile.
Sauntering:
O
one morning up
St.
James’s-fireet, hanging
on Sevigny’s arm, and confidering how I Ihould emL-ploy the next hour ; a pretty face in a illiner’s Shop inSIantly decided the debate, and we were as instantly in the houSe.-—‘‘ Bring us forne Avord knots.

child,’’ faid Lucius, carlefsiy drav^^ing out his purfe j then Smiling in her
face.
Tiife Trinice t.
face, “ Faith thou art very pretty,*’ continued he.— The girl, however, feemed to have nothing feminine about her but her beauty j and paying for the ribbon that beauty had difpofed of, we tnrned to leave her—Obferving an elegant female crofs the (hop, and on feeing us, hold a handkerchief to her face, “ Who have you there, my dear,” faid I j-—“ A young woman,, Ihe replied, my mifrefs Sometimes employs;’’ and Vv’as proceeding to Satisfy my curiofity, but the fair one had reached the door : which not opening So readily as She ex-pedled, Sevigny flew to aflifl: her. Heavens, Sydney!, he exclaimed, it is Mifs Finchley.”—And Seizing her hand;, led her to a Small parlour behind the Ihop. There, .Danvers, we learnti—upon my Soul, I forget what. Suffice it, I conveyed Belvidera to an aunt of lady Juliet’s, who received her with pleaSure.
That I waited on Lefler
convinced
him
conducted him to
her

— >

The Trinket.
261
her feet-—and ftayed a week longer in London to prefent him with her hand.
The day after the wedding, pretending perfedt ignorance of her machinations, I called on Charlotte Darcy ; rattled of their felicity, his love and
transports—In fliort, completely mortified the poor devil.—-Then changed my tone, vowed Lefier was reSolved to discover the fiend that had fo long deferred their union—laughed at the ill-concerted plot, which only folly could have planned, or envy have executed then dwelt on Belvidera’s charms, her happinefs had given new rofes to her cheeks, and Lefier idolized her.
Good God ! cried I, observing Charlotte turn pale, are you not well ?—the poor girl to be fu^e was greatly to be pitied—a whole night confined in that confounded houSe—tho’ really, my dear Mifs Darcy, this concern for your friend is very obliging^—but the goodnefs of
your heart, madam—Ah, I am convinced
The Trinket.
cd colonel and Mrs. Lefler think them*-
I
felves infinitely indebted to your friend-
ship.’
And lookingat my watch, pro-
tefted I had forgot that I had promiSed them to give my opinion of Some jewels— and left her bunding with rage
and envy. We have been in Paris fome time,and propofe continuing herelong-er than we tird intended; for really the poor Souls finds us So neceSlary to their happinefs, it would be cruelty to deprive them of our company^—xA.h, Danvers, what is this punctilio, to which
*
we Sacrifice ?—Faihion regulates the feelings of the heart, and we have loaded felicity with the fetters of ceremony but Mifs Edi^erton is above theSe
O
common forms ; yet, in obedience to her commands, 1 Shall day here a few weeks longer, and hit on forne method to “ lafli the lingering moments into
Emma, to Soften abSencCj
Speed.”
makes Fanny’s letters the vouchers of her condancy : fweet girl! She referves
her
The Trinket.
263
her hand for Sydney— and really, my dear Sir George,
Young men of Such Spirit,
Will ever attain the reward of their merit,’’
LETTER XLVIIL
4
Mifs Edgerton to Lady Eliza
Beauclerk,
H, my dear Eliza, it is impoITible
to conceive a more agreeable party ! the marquis is the moSt amiable of men j Fanny’s happinefs has encreafed her vivacity—-Sir Harry is tranfported with the general joy, and lady Amelia, not the lead; jovial in the throng. ‘And in the name of wonder, you exclaim, what is the fource of this uncommon aiety ?:—How difagreeable to defcend
§
to narrative j however, child, to Satisfy your curiofity, you mud know that we have found mifs Sydney’s Montreal :
the fird coup-d'ceih I confefs was attended
N
2
The Trinket.
cers
<C
icd with no very agreeable circumllances nothing that promiSed the felicity that fucceeded. Lady Amelia, miSs Sydney, Sir Harry, and mySelf, went lad week to the rooms.—“ Charming couple/’ was the firll found that Struck our ears—of courSe three women were not destitute of curiofity ; we prefTed forward to give our opinion of the dan-
how gracefully they move,’* exclaimed I, turning to Fanny—die caught hold of my arm—“ let us retire Emma.”—The dear girl was the picture of death j pale, trembling, disorderedI accompanied her to a more private part of the room ; “ Ah, mifs Edgerton, faid She, had any one told me Montreal was incondant —- “ She would have proceeded, but the lover die accufed was at her fide. He was all love and tranfport—his Fanny’s heart and language, tendernefs chaden-ed by modedy.—He introduced the duke and duchefs.—‘‘ Happily, (faid
his

The Trinket.
265
Bis grace) in compliance with my foil’s ardent folicitations, I had this morning given that confent, which had I before feen Mifs Sydney, he fhould not fo often have requeued.”
Montreal informed us, that to oblige his mother, he had attended her to the rooms and the next day he was to have reached A<5lon-Hall.—‘Ceremony only, retards their union; and lady Amelia would not yield one point of pundlilio for the univcrfe.—The good old foul is fo bufy, fo delighted, fo pleafed with her aflumed importance, that Mifs Sydney and myfelf are inconceivably diverted ; while Montreal’s native politenefs frequently yields to his impatience.—Blefs me ! a poff-chaife
imaginable, alights from it—Sir Harry flies to him—-he embraces him.^—Ah, Eliza, my heart anticipates felicity.
and the mod agreeable^ man
N
% .
Sir
266
The Trinket
Sir Harry Edgerton in continu
ation.
Yes, madam, the father'—-the bro
ther is reftored
and Emma commif-
fions me to difclofe her happinefs come, lady Eliza, and convince the dear
She
would herfelf have concluded her let-
girl it may be ftill augmented.

ter, but this day we cannot yield her even to friendship—but you mull: join us madam j if afFedion is no inducement, be not deaf to curioSity ; and we have tales of wonder to relate——perils by fea and land,
Emma is by my fide — flie claims the pen—and on my refufing to deliver it, would have me tell you how nearly fhe had loft her father, even when in fight of England : but he is reftored to us—and melancholy refledions can no longer find entrance in the mind of
Henry Edgerton,
T H E T R I N K E T.
267
LETTER LXIX.
Sir Harry Edgerton to Edward
Willis, Efq.
O M E, my dear Edward, and be witneSs of our happineSs, a happi-nefs which at my brother’s arrival, I considered as incapable of addition 5 yet every hour is marked by its encreafe. The other morning, Emma with great gaiety rattled over the keys of her harp-fichord, when the door opened, and Sydney was announced—^As he entered the room, Frederick flarted from his chair^ “ My hero, my deliverer,” cried he, embracing him j then prefenting him to Emma, “ My child, continued he, this is the man to whom you owe your father.”—Aiiguflus cad: down hris eyes an'd bludied, but MifsErfgerton approached, and offering her h
d
^ T A

i fc

■ 'V C T

inimitable grace, “ My dear, Mr„ ney, faid £he, how perfect my felr^
9
■-Y	• -
Y ;lip_	^ A

A

N 2
when
/
268
T H E T R I N K E T.
/*
when duty gives a fan<5tion to inclination, and the judgment Strengthens the propenlities of the heart.”
He prefled the hand jfhe offered to
his lip
and rny brother related the
of
accident to which before he had only flightly alluded •, Sidney all the while endeavouring by a thoufind Sprightly
Sallies to draw his Emma’s attention
/
from a narrative, the fubftance which was, that coming from Calais to Dover, the fea v^as calm, and their paffage uncommonly tedious ; Sydney Stepped into the boat, and called to his friends in the packet to join him : they agreed, and preparing the ffShing tackle, pufhed off* to Seek amufement. When they returned with their Spoils, Mr. Edgerton, catching at a rope which was thrown to them from on board, mifTed his aim, and unfortunately fell into the Sea : Auguftus jumped in, and fuftained him till he could receive fur-ther afliftance.—My brother retired to
the

The Trinket.
26©
the cabin, a frefli gale fprung from the Southward, and brought them^prefently to Dover.—Sydney landed firft, took poft-horfes, and fefoff inftantly.—Some bufinefs that required difpatch detained him Several days,in London j and Frederick, hearing we were at Bath, reached us a fortnight before him.
“ My dear Sydney, continued he, you muft now permit me to exprefs that gratitude, \yhich you have hitherto fo' ffudioully avoided.”

Ceafe, I beg of you, my friend
A man never looks fo foolilh as when, liftening to acknowledgements :—the fervice I was fo fortunate to render you humanity enforced, and any other in
your
lituation fliould have received
but Mr. Edgerton had a double claim
were
to my affiftance and my life well loft for the father of my Emma.
Laft week the marquis received his bride, and we attended him to the altar, where again, we fhortly fhall ap-
N3
X



S70
The Trinket
pear, and give Emma to AugufluS”, Amid thefe pleafures, my dear Willis, I regret your abfence; — but if no inducement can prevail on you to vilit Bath, let me hope, that on our return to H—, you will no longer refufe to join us, and to heighten the enjoyments of
Your ever faithM
Hek II \




L E T T E

Augustus Sydney, ESq. to Sir'
George Danvers.
WAY with thofe gloomy mortals who tell us felicity was not made • for man : — I have been thefe three days a convincing proof of the fallacy of their boafted reafoning—Emma is mine as indilTalubly as the prieft can make her,—-There, Danvers, if that
Sentence
V.I
The Trinket.
271
Centence is not fufficient to Silence thef@ arguers, may the world follow my example, and from experience confute them:—but above all things, let us be careful, my dear George, to cultivate an habitual chearfulnefs of diSpoIition,
ft
which will blunt the fting of adverfity^ and give new charms to happinefs.
F I N I



/
A
A





\
O OKS printed for T. Lowndes,
s.TTyOOD’s Body of Coveyancing, 3 vols,
VV 10s.
2.	Wood’s Inftitutes of the Civil Law, publiflied by Mr. Serjeant Wilfon, il. 7s.
3.	Jacob’s Law Diftionary, 2I. 2s.
4.	Camden’s Britannia, 2 vols. 4I. 4s.
5.	Miller’s Gardener’s DidUtionary, with Cuts, 2 vols. 3I. 3s.
6.	Pdillethwayte’s DifHonary of Trade and Commerce, 2 vols. 4I. '4s.
7.	A two-fteet Map of Stafford/hire, engraved in 1747, with alphabetical Lifts of the Hundreds, Towns, &c. the whole properly coloured, 2s.
8.	New Editions of Lowndes’s Marriage Regifters, cn Paper, Parchment, and Vellum. Twenty-five flieets of demy paper contain 400 complete Regifters, which are fold at 4s. Some are printed on Parchment demy fize, at is, others on Vellum, at 2s. per leaf.
g. The Hiftory of London, from the Foundation to the prefent Time, including the feveral Parifhes in Weftminfter, Middlefex, Southwark, &c. within the Bills of Mortality.	By William Maitland, F. R. S.
and brought down to the prefent Time by the Rev. Mr. Entick, in 2 vols. with cuts, 4I.
10.	Milton’s Paradife Loft, with Dr. Newton’s Notes and Cuts, 2 vols. 4to. 2I. los.
11.	Dr. Cullen’s Materia Medica, i8s. bound.
12.	Rev. Mr. Whitaker’s Hiftory of Manchefter, with Plates. 15s. in boards.
13.	Dr. Prieftly on Eledlricity, il is
-14. Heifter’s General Hiftory of Surgery, il is
15.	Anfon’s Voyage, with Cuts and Maps, il is
16.	Beggar’s Opera, with the Mufic in Score, 2s 6d
17.	Alexander’s Feaft, Semele, L’Allegro ed il Pen-ferofo, Occafional Oratorio, Solomon, Sufannah, Jof-feua, by Fred. Handel, Ef^; is each
S 4|'
5.
Bi
^ i ' T -
4^ V	ik '¥
X <* k •«.<
* <	'». ^ i»
*, ’	,‘T If
X *av4 'Xm**	S<«4
i '
ION
/
Mr”
\\
%»J. J ' ' ^
.d'


>-
1:' ■'
£9^
\
\





-5^
-*^S.
/
• /
A	%•''	
	/t	
	"c"'V	
'i;' ■ T		

/’*
fit'
/.




r ■	'• -■'V?-.- 'cAv':0.;.vC"'Ci-'	. ... '.n' -	AA-	‘A v s. . *.
■	■■;v’	-'A''\
■	'"‘7 V'-,''-' ' .a77vV-7-'''"a"
■ . C. ,	‘	.'V	' i;	^	'	'■ ■ T * ■	'	' rA~-' r 'A'i ■
' i- '	■" ' •	V* •''■ ■ ’-.C ' •' - • .'	NO* ' • . ' , - .• '-•*•; - - ■'*
"	vSh;:.v . c; L;.VAAAVCNASA''A^¥Ate	.
' ■ ....


■ .-'"A A^ A . ‘v'^
T"	V*' • ''	' . ^
^	• i

. * c	-Ny-N*-NrVO A-'S-A te’rN '	■ ‘	- v.-'.yv	^
:'v	'■■. . .■ . • C:
d	i-'- -	- ■.
' ■ ■. A/N'vcC -■•
-.•	•. -	-.	- ...	i	^	,■-- <■'
A;, s:''.''." ■■ ■■;■■' -■'• '■■/,."s"'-A 'i'■	An ,N-\
*.	■	.‘ C . '"-	■ .'	■ .w' .N . ’ -
■•.'•	. •-	'■•	..	“•	.N-"'- .'AT •'-	•
c-T .-■-c;* A A^-‘‘'" i'_..vAnAA^;
' ^ A ''S' ’ '.' •. ■ • T"' V'T "A '	' *r.-.	■'•■.'" .-.D ' ■•' V- S'?.	h ~~d • ‘	*	•' !• ' ' b
'‘*v/;r-•• C'	vV-■'•Ns'. .VA ‘D'S .N,'
■'.	^	■':'.■ V. •■'	■' ;,	V . K , .'■.-...r'N' ■ -•-	,.:'N'
* '	'.'U r O .'.	• -.
, ^
-y.
.A-Arb V
•	' - ■“ .v.rS''**
b'	•'>*•: • VS:,
• ^	• i.
: -O' -.r .*. -	■,	.
.	--O' .'. V''

■‘b -L	V"	b-' -	■-■■»—C' '■ t'-*. ■' N 'b-'^ -,- 'V ■' .	- ■..- -	C-‘ j	-
■;■ . ; A.inT' "l'AAAAnAa. "S V	V S • A'-' '' "Av AA'A	TN'-Vo---:
A -- '-' ^	' ‘ ■-'A ' “ A b. '•■'T'' n. * . ' '	- ■	' C O;‘	•.S'N;--,	'	->■■■ \.
' ' ■	-..-'N' " h ’’-N,'.N	^	N' —	^ h '	'
■ - . . S ..	'i. ;	. ■■ .''.'Jb.. ■. ,'C;- ‘ A ' . n'-;Ab 's', ,' v-vc. v\;^\A/bAAN>>-' Nb-.. -b .	-
-V :AA;;A;A b'A-	A ASj,A.'>^-A'A>Aaa‘AA'A'-aA, A
;. : ' AA-.v.-A ■-. A-A-Ar:^../’;^AA'.-A A; ; A^A AA.A'?AbA.AAbAAA'‘'^:''^hAAc-AApy^:A;AAA
- ,b..	■ b-N ‘ ■' .'•, : ,*" N T	Aj 'b^ ■.■ '■. SjnAAA' A. ivCb

:b 'nT-. ^ •
"T-." V


.^'A'..,-Ay .AAA:-A'!AS A'' *• AVvA b -n A^.* bi^Ao^A ..:/^- :vi-AAtc.v ;;;
■; . --r Ci-N. v^>.D-Z--vN:.N' ’A^-AA ‘-Abb^vVA-'.v:'■>>'% -AC'-NV
A^AA::::AvAA,ANsrA.i A-.^
:	nAA ..A^ V .. ;.n;A*:: . T o ■ 'L-V--
•	‘	•'%.	♦-	••	»'*"*v*.	.	'	*““#*	*•	* *.*^r *• '^ •	^
•••'•• :	,• ..,■'F -'yd. . '
, '■-	;	^i.T V‘S‘	“ > b'.S•v.VNr. _•■
.' ■;■	' T ''	Ac'''■'Ay.T- *i.A'AS--vS:A.^.sN‘ -Ac AA7

i-V
a-- . ^r-mcfeiASAA	FA:A
■• ■ -.a-	■ ■	• • , .i- ■>	\	■' a-'-L'	•■--	-'L'
Vb.i.	>./. ■ ,.a. ; :.,:;'-Saa>Vac^5vCVaia
• -r- -a'-V '	'■' -■	^ :
AdL-im AA '
rif . c .:,;NSLV':CTO:::^■■a■'^■■,V :;^-^- T^: CCaNOb>:':-'C"a.-.::a^^Ta
.aCbb..:;',
ab' --'-Nb ■■ Lb.. L-: -;=^LLai;.	./;
. ■- .aba- -^.	LLAbbaVV : .a- '-' iAAA'AA
A:r.r:^AxA::A^rA-dAA^'A^Afm-A^riri-A'\^^rAAA-ririi^dt:^SrriAr-^^riAAlrA^^^

%
n,
	■ i
	
	1
Ws	
/fes	V'
	
'■. .-h-	•1






xs;


>1
■'■■' / J -Xi^
¥•
5*'
h^^


'^y.
:^!P - *•.- O'
V

r.SJV--i

•::<

/:
:
^ - 3 ri
‘.t N-
1' <y.
■>f.
'Kj
->fi

LCC
.V Vi
r.‘ ' ,rfl'
I
-V. -1

L 1




' A'l-i
It-
pi^-r-
lA*4»!

mar-L

M

m
•f* “•V* ^
-*s ^
vV

m.
l- . c
• •
• A > v -fe


inches
1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11 (A)	12	13	14	15
39.12	65.43	49.87	44.26	55.56	70.82	63.51	39.92	52.24	97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06	62.15
13.24	18.11	-4.3^4	-13.80	9.82	-33.43	34.26	11.81	48.55	-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19'	-1.07
15.07	18.72	-22.29	22.85	-24.49	-0.35	59.60	-46.07	18.51	1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28	0.19
D50 llluminant, 2 (Jegree observer
Density
0.04
0.09
0.15
0.22
0.36
0.51

|0I N 1 I
500	200
Oi Pi
i' I' - -
dc*« pf »«Kh (Opocal)	gQQ
S‘
300
700


centimeters
lii|-/lll|Mll|2>iiMii>l3>llMl>l|4l>lMlll|5lM|lili|6ili|iiii|7iii|iiii|giii|iiii|9iii|iiii|^()
16 (M)	17	18(B)	19	20	21	22	23	24
49.25	38.62	28.86	16.19	8.29	B3.44	31.41	72.46	72.95
-0.16	-0.18	0.54	-0.05	-0.81	-0.23	20.98	-24.45	16.83
0.01	-0.04	0.60	0.73	0.19	0.49	-19.43	55.93	68.80
25
26
27
28
29
30
5
29.37
13.06
-49.49
54.91
■38.91
30.77
43.96
52.00
30.01
82.74
3.45
81.29
52.79
50.88
-12.72
50.87
•27.17
■29.46
L* ^ a* ^
0.75
0.98
1.24
1.67
2.04
2.42
SN: OL0007
Colors by Munsell Color Services Lab ^