:‘ss'sb::^''sSs	T H E	SlS
' '	‘	V *• '.*	•’ ,	.	.	r .-A	'■	.'	'	■	/ . '• .	. • ^_	' v'-.'.''.' i '. ■ '
■	■ ■	■	'	’	'■ .'•■■'vi' ,	.	. <	..	.	.,	"‘''r	. ■	.	’	.	- .■■ '■ •;
tV»..4L otherN,■ v'
: ^	■ ■ . ■	i	r	; /'■ •	• ■' '	l
; ■ ,	. 'O'. Beingi-the	- ,■ r;
*V	i,: ,	f	.	.-	•■ "	-	-'A' T	. - ..r.^	■-
■	'••■	■ i ■ .	'	. ■'■	: -i ■	'.	•	-	,	■:;.'	. F	r •■	,- V
i	. '■	..	., — •/,.,	fi . . . ■ - '7 . •	■‘ '*’■ ■ ■	'■ ■. ; . -
S7 Tra^^ AM
ao4 difihf|riste^sta{fipn;Gfa:^	‘
S-:'" 'of. ^^pmine0Si$Mt|»niin'V|(e':L\A.-y^^^^
LAte^fiSa ccmfidei^ihfeTarni^^fy^^
■;. '	.. ■.•re ■ '
liw'ill —ll.» ■! !■!' I'l i^^■■l■ll     III        1
fe.v	rihi^:'''''’'.MA-
d-Sd.Vt^mtIAhy:as- fitre .tiect^ed M	■
ri- AriiAk0d.fi^y or ■h^i;y' we:aJIA^	ri: -ri: ■ S
;Cl. ■ •"' ■	;...'S: yv'C.3La.-;^S0.Q'w l' , .bOi
""'>V.L	.	•	■'	^	..■'C,.'.'L -VS ’	■ ■,■	' ‘C''-'S’ ■	C';f<;;
•'.	'	'	'	■>'	''■	i .	•■	•• ' ' • - ■"./■•	r ■	.	• •	■;.	■	^
••;■'?	.	.-. . •-'• •-- ^ '■ 'v..‘- -''l'C	-h' "	■	/ 'S-', ■•-Ci
^^^kss S--'. ; ..7/ Lio E':pA:NAhAV
!^^|finted-fbr J. RD,B-T-RN-S. in-1 7 •' 7;':;j
:;h;e^.BpokfcHers'’in'Tpwfl	■ S L ''l.:. j
f'A/r.: '...'7' •{, ..V ’'7.'' ■|Price:.;t:s;-.6,:d.y '77-:	■ ‘t;- T' ■;: 7L..; .,■	S.7'S-
m
/

j
t	*	■
‘	THE
I
' Unnatural Mother:
t ■	.	■
Innocent Love Perfecuted.
ttiy Return from a Journey,
I took about two Years ago ® ^ W after the King, on account of Some
Affairs which I had then depend-y> ^ing before the Council, I heard that' the eldest Mademoifelle de U Epine had IV* been dead about three Months, and that She . 4 t^ied in a very deplorable manner. I lamented $ her ILofs.y not that I was particularly acquaint-
cd with her, but becauSe She was one of the
r s '•	^
'" greatest Beauties in the Neighbourhood. All N the W orld Spoke ill of SD^pfez^ and told me ’
.4 alhoufand Stories of his Barbarity ; in Short,
T they Said So much, that although I did not V ^now him by the Defcription that was made,
B	and
>
‘ ’• A
F': *
W , .
[ 2 ]
and theChara<5ter that was given of him,I imagined he was Guilty. He was not at Paris when I arrived there, neither did he return thither 'till about three Months after.
As we had always been very good Friends,
I went then to vifit him, and finding him very pale and wan, fancy'd that he was just upon the Recovery from a Fit of Sicknefs. When I entred the Room he was leaning upon a Table, his two Hands Supporting his Head, but he rofe up at the noife I made in entring, and my first Salutation drew him quite out of a profound	wherein he was buried. I
faw before him a Letter lying open, whofe writing Seem’d to me to be a Woman’s. We embraced each other, and I condoled with him on his ill State of Health, exprefied.my Concern for his Melancholy, and endeavoured to com-■ fort him.
The Wound is here, my dear Friend, faid he, laying his Hand upon his Heart, I fliall never recover it; this faid, the Tears came into his Eyes. He then took the Paper that was upon the Table, and kishng it, put it into a PurSe, which he wore upon his Breast, like a Cafe for Relicks.
I perceived therein the Pidlure ofMademoV felle cle JJ JEI Itie 'y he began to figh, and Spoke to me with So much Diforder,and So little Go-hcrence, that I pitty’d his Condition. I began then to have Some Suipicion of the Matter,
wherefore to divert his Sorrows, and to Sa-
tisfy
[ 3 i
tisfy my Doubts j this Letter, Said I, ought not to have been delivered to you, at your just coming out of an lllneSs, and when you are So much alter’d for the worfej they ought to have Spared you this Shock; for either 1 am greatly deceived, or 'tis that which caufes your preScnt Melancholy.
I have not been fick, anfwered he, nor is this Letter the Caufe of my Sorrows, it only- indulges them. I think I know the Hand, replyki I, and believe it is MademoijeUe de TJ Epines ^ you are not mistaken, returned he, it is indeed her’s. But how can flie write to you, pursued I, when file is dead, as all the World Says* She is So, continued he, would to Heaven flie was not; 1 stiould not be here, but Ihe would not be entirely lost to me.
At theSe Words his Grief increafed more then ever, his Tears trickled down his Cheeks amain, and his redoubled Sighs gave me to understand, that there were Some material Particulars in this Adventure, which were not come to the Knowledge of thoSe who had been my Informers.
But, purSued I, why is the Death of this Woman So grievous to you, when you abandon’d \ her during her Life ? Did I abandon her, reply’d he, with Hands and Eyes uplifted ! Oh! God; how can any one be guilty of inventing Such a FalShood ? Tis the Belief Said I, ot thfe Publick j I valuenot the Belief of the Publick, added he; but cou’4 you, that knew m.e, give Credit to it ? And ought ton yuo
B 2	ot
[4]
/
to have taken my Part ? All Appearances are against you, reply"d I. They have impofed on all the World, Said he, and I am not much in Pain about undeceiving them,- but as for you, who judge So ill of me, I will difabufe you, although your little Esteem for me might excufe me from that Complaifance.
That Shall be when you pleafe, anfwer’d L We are not in a convenient Place, replyM he ; but let us,go out, and in walking, 1 will relate to you the Whole of that Affair. I took Advantage therefore of his good Difpofition ; and getting into my Coach we fet out on the Road to Vincennes,
During the whole Way he Scarcely open’d his Mouth, at least I only heard him figh, and utter Some Words indistintstly, which the Noife of the Wheels prevented my understanding. As foon as the Coach went on with leis Noife, I begg’d him to oblige me with the Story he had promifed, but cou’d not as yet get two Words together from him; at last, being come to the Wood, he made the Coach stop, and alighted without faying a Syllable to me. I follow’d him then, and he defired me to order our Servants to wait for us, after yrhich, walking afide to a Place where we were ■fure of neither being overheard, nor interrupted, he began as follows.
In order to erafe entirely from your Mind, faid he, the falfe Impressions which the Pub-lick may have made therein, I need only give you
a
fc.’ *
[ 5 ]
a faithful Account of ail that has pafs’d between Mademoifelle de Id Epine and myfdf ,• you will at once fee my Innocence, and the ill Fortune that attended this poor Woman and me. I call her Woman, becaufe She was adually my Wifej you will befides know the Reafon I have to mourn eternally, for having been the innocent Caufe of her Death.
You know that, to my Misfortune, I am the only Son of one who is in great Power in the Law. I fay to my Misfortune; for if my Father had been a Man of lefs Credit and Authority, and had been lefs to be feared, I ShoLi’d not be, as I now am, the most miserable of Mankind.
Mary-Magdalen de L'Epine^ with whom you was acquainted, was the eldest of three Daughters, and one Son, whom their Father when dying, left under the Tuition of their Mother. He was an Italian by Extratstion, of a good Family, but not rich. He came into France with Cardinal Mazarin.^ who had given him an Employment there till his Death, when he left his Widow involv’d in the World with the Affairs of her Family, and amongst the rest with a curfed Law-Suit, which is the Caufe of all my Misfortunes, and which is not yet ended.
My Father cou’d be of great Service to her d in the Decifion of this Affair, which was fodii' expected, wherefore Mademoifelle de UEpine^ V^hq liv’d pretty near pur Houfe, came thither
frequent-
16 1
frequently to follicit her Caufe, She had powerful Recommendations, but if I had been Judge, the most powerful wou'd have been the lovely Daughter that accompany'd her. You have Seen her; She had an exceeding fine Skin, was tall and well Shap'd. Her Hair was the fairest that could be Seen, her Face oval, and her Eyes blue, as fair Women s generally are. Her Beauty was lively, and had not a certain heavy Languor So common to all fair Women. -The Tone of her Voice was infinii-ating and agreeable; her Behaviour was perfectly charming, and feem’d to defire nothing but Tendernefs, and to breath nothing but Eove, nor were her Looks deceitful.
Tis certain however, that fhe was not fway’d by the PleaSlires of the Senfes ,* as for her Soul, She deferv’d all that a Woman can pretend to; She was noble, fincere, frank, and liberal; capable of carrying on an Engagement to the last Gafp; fruitful in Inventions, fearful in taking Refolutions, but bold in putting them in Execution when taken; She was difinterest-ed, a good Friend, and a more faithful MiS^ trefs.
She had fo little Ambition, that I have heard her Say a thoufand Times, that if She had been Mistrefs of herfelf, She wou’d have pre-ierr’d a poor and quiet Life to one full of Pomp and Honours, which cannot be acquir’d but at the Expence of one’s Repofe, and often of one's Sincerity; she was comolaifant to me, be-
caufe
[7]
caufe She loved me, but otherwife flie was naturally hasty.
I have Seen her a thoufatid Times do Things to which no human Confideration cou’d have induced her, and that only becaufe She knew they pleas’d me; She was very referved to me, yet very fond, but without Impudence ; and I have often Seen her receive me in her Arms, and even Seek my Embraces, at a Time when I knew that I Sliou’d have pleas’d ^ sher, in not taking Advantage of her Advances. In a Word She was the most accomplish’d Mistrefs and WiSe that can be conceived.
I faw her in a Hall where my Father ufed to hear Caufes, her Mother and She were waiting for his coming out of his Clofet. I was Surpriz’d at her Beauty ; and thinking I only did through Civility, what I did through the first Impulfes of my Heart, I offer’d to introduce them to him. I took the Mother then by the Hand, and led her into the Clofet: Here, Sir, faid I to my Father, is a Mother and Daughter, which I prefent you; they have been waiting a great while, and I thought they ought to have Some .Distinction Shown them ; they have too good a Mien not to de-ferve the Preference : If my Recommendation cou’d be of any Service to them, I would beg you to be their Friend. I then went out, and the Mother had Time to fay what fhe would to him, for She staid with him above an Hour.
I met
[ 8 ]
J
I met them again at their coming out, as if by Chance, and ask’d them if they had been ' heard to their Sat is Sad ion. Yes, Sir, anfweFd the Mother, and ’tis a very great Obligation which we have to you. I have inform’d your Father of all the Tricks that are play’d me, and I hope he will foon dome Justice. I wiShit depended upon me. Madam, Said I, it should be done this very Day : She thank’d me, and they took their Leave. I perceiv’d that the Daughter had always blush’d when she look’d ' upon me, and that she had turn’d away her Head when ever I cast my Eyes on her.
I fet a Footman upon the Watch, to give me Notice of an Evening when they were at their Door, not the Mother, whom I did not want, but her amiable Daughter, with her Sisters. I went thither very frequently, and Sometimes we took a Walk upon the Ramparts, and in the Gardens 5 but I cou’d neither get an Opportunityof talking apart to her Daugh* ter, nor of having a private Conversation with her alone. I was very well receiv’d however, not only on account of the Services which I had done them, but alfo on account of thofe which I might render them for the future.
When the Weather would no longer allow us to take the Diverfion ot Walking, I went to their Houfe, and made one at Cards. W@ play’d there for a meer Trifle ,* wherefore, with a View only to keeping up the Converfation, ai]d toshave a Pretence to go thither every
Evening^
[ 9 ]
Evening, I managed Matters, fo as to forth a Set Company, which held together for a long Time.
In order to this, I told them that what we play’d for beingbut a Trifle, the only way to continue the Society with as much PleaSure as it begun, would be to contrive feme Diver-fion; that to that End we must chooSe dne of the Ladies Treafurer, by the Plurality of Voices, to whoSe Custody all the Money Should be committed; that the Winners Should pocket none of their Winnings, and that the Lofers Should pay to the Stock ; to the end that when there was enough in Bank, it Should be laid out in a Party of Pleafure, where no Body Should disburfe any thing, and yet where we fhould all be agreeably diverted.
The Propofal was accepted, and the Company fettled : We were eight in all; c^/z. the two eldest Daughters, two young Gentlewomen of the Neighbourhood, and the Lovers of all the four. I Shall not name them, as their Names have no Relation to what I am going to fay. We obliged our Selves to be there every Evening, and it was agreed that the youngest Daughter Should Supply the Place of whoever Should be abfent, and that who- -ever ’twas, Sliould be obliged to pay her Lo-Sings, or to give her as much as stie fhould win : This last Condition was not agreed on without Some Dilflculty, the Mother and the
C	Daughter^
C lO ]
baiightcrs all oppoSing it ^ but, however, at last, they did eonfent to it.
The Ladies alone were exempted from paying the Forfeit, to which the Men were condemn'd in Cafe they fail’d coming; We would all have made this Forfeit Somewhat Gonfide-rable, but we were not allow’d to be the Masters in that Point: Neverthelefs our Treasure would not have been much increaSed thereby, for we had all of us our Secret Views therein, which would not permit us to miL being there : The Forfeit of the Ladies was to kiSs us all round,' and the eldest Mcidemoi-fglle de U IPpine^ was our TreaSufer.'
We play’d then every Evenings and I Sought in vain an Opportunity of Speaking to her alone, for I could find none, and was not, a Jot the nearer. ’Tis impostible to be more reServed than She was for near four Months ;■ She perceiv’d very plainly that I did not look upon her wkh Indifference, and Saw that fbniethiiSg more then Play drew me to her Mother’s ,• but She avoided So carefully all Oc-eafions of talking with me alone, that I could not Say any Thing to her by Word of Mouth.
We open'd our TreaSure at McirtUmas and although we had play’d very low, it was enough to entertain us perfedly well, 6nd our Company being Seled, we Spent an Evening the most agreeably that ever I paSs’d one in my.Life, Nevertheless, we had not d|)ent all, and every one was So well pleaScd,
that
C II 3
that it was refolved to go on playing, that wc might have enough to be merry at the Midnight Mafsy to choofe King ^teeUy and to conclude with a good Supper, and ahand-fbme Ball on ShroveVIuejdaj ; and aSter our manner of playing, we did not doubt having enough to do Things after an elegant Manner.
The Society then was re-united more firmly than before, and the Forfeits made greater.
Notwithstanding my Assiduity, however, I was but just where I was. My Mistrefs was all Day either wfith her Mother, or her Sisters j and, in the Evening, the Company gave her a thoufand Opportunities of avoiding mo, without Shewing that she did it defignediy. Nevertheless I was refolv’d to explain myfelf^ and to know what I was to depend on : I loved her too well, to remain any longer in an Uncertainty, and not being able to fpeak to her in PerSon, I wrote the following Note.
L E T T E R.
XL O U han)e too much Pen:€tration^ not to ^ haue ohfev'Pd my Sentiments for you ^ I have been able to explain myfelf only by my Kyes^ btit I belieue they haue exprefid them* fehes pretty intelligihly, Sthe Prefence of fo many.People^ with whom you are perpetually fufroimdedy and your Study to prevettt my having any Opportunity of [peaking to youy have obliged me to be Jilent. If you have no t
C 2	hither u
•	t
d d ,
hit her to difcenid my ILO’ve^ I will hlame my IByes^ not much skilId in that ILanguage j hut if you ha^ve difcoverd it^ and ha^e under-fiood their Loohyl will accufe yoti of Indifference ^ or rather of Cruelty to me : Deliver me from my Uncertainty j the whole Happinefs of my Life depends upon your Anfwer,
I clapt this Note into her Hand, and flie made a Motion, which made me fear that She had not taken it ,* nevertheless Ihe did take it, blufliing, and without looking upon me : After this, I obferved that She did not play that Night with her ufual Gaiety.
I return’d thither again next Day, and placed myfelf by her ; She pretended to have let Something drop, and in stooping stipt a Note into my Goat. I was too impatient to fee what it contain’d, not to Satisfy mySelS that Minute ,* wherefore I quitted my Cards, which I begg’d her Mother to hold for me, and went to read it in a Chamber adjoining. It was not long, being only an Appointment which She made me, to hieet her next Morning at the Sainte Chapelle^ whilst her Mother was to be at the Palais with her Lawyers. I went in then, and again took my Cards, very glad that my Intrigue began by an Af-stgnation.
I did not fail being there, and she arrived a Minute after; and the Mafs which I had pretended to hear being over, every Body went
out.
[ H ]
out, and we were left almofi: alone in the Church. Then, the Moments being too precious to be lost, I drew near her , Well, Ma-' demojfelle-y Said I, Shall I now know what you are pleas’d Shall be my Doom ? I don’t know, anSwer’d Ihe, what will be your Doom j but as to what relates to my Self, my Heart forebodes me no Good, which can possibly come of your Addresses; and if I were to be ruled by its MiSgivings, I Ihould deprive you at once of all manner of Hope ; I Should even beg you to come no more to my Mother’s; and, in Short, should never look upon you whilst I live.
The Prefages of your Heart, Mademoifelle^ faid I, are very fatal to me j but do you feel nothing in that Heart which oppofes them ? There must certainly, replied she, be Some what stronger then them, fince I no longer find myfelf in the fame Refolution now I am with you, as I had taken the Night before last, and which brought me hither. I would not have broken off Correspondence with you, becaufe I have enter’d into none ; but I would have begg’d you not to think of engaging in one, and have told you that you are too indifferent to me, for me to look upon you any otherwife then as my Duty requires.* But — Here she stopt short, with Tears in her Eyes.
Go on, Mcidemoifelle^ faid I, explain that ^ut to me. What would you have me fay
reply’d.
I >4 ]	'
^eply’d She, blulhing V I no longer find my Self in the Same Difpofition as I was in this Morning. The Sandity of the Place where we were, did not prevent my killing her Hand with Such Tranfports as I had never felt before, and as made me almost befide mySelfi
The Place, however, was not convenient for difeourfingj thole who had enter’d might have been fcandaliz’d thereat; wherefore I carry'd her to a Bookfeller s near that Place, and we Seated ourfelyesdn his Shop. 'Twas the Way by which her Mother was to paSs, and the Bookfeller knowing me, we there treated of our Affairs fully, and without Affedation.
I thank'd her for her Sincerity ^ She an-fwer’d, that I ought not to judge the Icfs favourably' of her Virtue ; for that Ihe did mt know by what Force flic had been hurry'd away, but She had lov’d me from the first Moment She faw me, and long before She had Spoken to me. She added, that this was the Caufe of her having follow’d her Mother without Reludance in her Sollicitations, hoping that by going frequently to my Father’s, fhe might at last 'find an Opportunity to fpeak to me, or at least to See me. She Said farther, that fhe made this Confession, to the End that I might not believe her Afedion to me, was the Effed of her Gratitude, nor of her Ambition, and that I might be Satisfied that her Heart alone had made me her Choice.
I Said
[ 15 3
I Said all that was possTible, to afluresher that fhe fill’d me with Joy by Such a tender Declaration ; and in Return, drew her the most lively Picture that I could imagine of my Love* I believe. Said fhe, that it is fueh as you represent it, and I wifh it; but, after all, you oblige me to take a Step, of which I Sear I Shall have SufficientTime to repent. You love me, you tell me So, and I believe it: I love you, I tell you So likewiSe ; What wiU be the Confequenceof all this ?
You fee plainly that we are not born for each other ; although I am of a good Family, it does not come near yours in Trance; your Estate Sets you a hundred Degrees above me^ and I am too prudent to grant you any Thing that may ruin me in your Esteem .* Thefe are the Reafons which ought to determine me absolutely to See you no more \ for, in Short, I fee not the least Profpect of an happy Issfue,; either for you, or mySelffor you, becauSe^ befides the Time you would lofe about me^ you would create yourfelf Enemies of thoSe' on whom you depend ; and for my Self, becaufe all the World being convinced, that I must not pretend to be your Wife,, will interpret your Vifits to my Disadvantage, and that at least if it does not cost me my Innocence, as I hope it will not, 1 fhall pay, with the Lofs of my Reputation, for the Pleafure I fhall have in Seeing you,
\
P aiv
C
I anfwer'd her, that I had already fug-gested to myfeif, all the Reafons which She could possibly alledge j but that my Resolution was fix’d : That it was true, we ought not to hope to be united by a happy Marriage, during my Father’s Life ^ but that at least we might be permitted to love each other, to tell each other fo, and to be marry’d unknown to him, fincc I was at Age ; that I would find Priests enough to marry us, if fhe would content thereunto ^ and that, afterwards, either the remote Parts of France^ or foreign Countries, would furnisti us with Places of Refuge, whither we might retire, till his Anger should be over.
In Anfwer to all this, she only turn d her Head afide, and faid that thefe were meer Chimeras ; that she could not content to a Marriage which would expote me to my Father’s Anger, and oblige us to leave the Kingdom, fuppoling we should have Time enough fo to do, which was to be doubted ; hecaufe, added she, if he should come to know it, tho’ we should find a Priest bold enough to dare offend him, he would not fail, being fo powerful as he is, to caute Such a Marriage to be declared clandestine, and you to be declared free ,* and to oblige me to pafs the rest of my Days in a Convent, laugh’d at, and defamed ; and undoubtedly very indifferent in your Eyes, by the En joyment of my Perfon, which would have given you a Difgust to me^ and that is*.
ail
}£iu
L 17 ]
-	' '
all I fear, for, as for the rest, I would nOt'
trouble niyfelf about it; But you would ceafc
to love me, and that is all which I appre-^
hend, becaufe I defire only your Heart, and
the Lofs of that would throw me into a real
Defpair : Or, if you should . still love mcj
stwould be only a Love founded upon De-^
cency, which would not hold out against the
ill Ufage of your Father, and the Beauty of
another Wife that might be offer’d you. I
endeavour’d to difpel her Fears, by all that
a Man So passionately in Love as myfelf could
fay, and did stagger her, but could not per^
fwade her.
At last her Mother came by, and found us together, without fufpecting the Reafon oil the Contrary, I have met you very fortunately, Sir, Said she, I want fuch a Friend. I ^offer’d her all the Service that lay in my Power, and she ask’d me, if I knew fuch a Man, whom she nam’d to me. I told her that he was one of my most intimate Acquaintance, and that I was Sure he would do me any Service^ She anSwered me, that it depended wholly iipon him, to fuster her to receive Some Money which she had caus’d to be attach’d ,* that the Attachments of the other Creditors had been withdrawn, and that his, which was taken out but the Night before, hinder’d her being paid; that she did not defire he should do any Prejudice to his own Pretenfions, by ate lowing her to replevin ^ that it would do. him
D	no
[ i8 ]
no Injury, being only a Trick of her Adversary’s, who had been to beg this Attachment, to prevent her being paid. I carry’d her Home, and my Friend, at my Request,, gave her what She demanded ; fhe thank’d me, receiv’d her Money, and 1 eondiKsted her to her Houfe.
I went thither in the Evening according to-Custom, and found her Daughter very melancholy and thoughtful. The Company ask’d her whether She was indiSpos’d ; She anfwer’d lio, and added that fhe and I had read at a Bookfellers, where her Mother had found us in the Morning, a Story of two Lovers whofe Love had cost them their Lives, She own’d that this had left a very cruel Impreshon in her Mind : An invented Story,the Application whereof I did not like, and accordingly I Sent her Word So next Day,
She gave me no Anfwer, neither could i in gage her to make me any Appointment, altho’ I often defired it of her. I could not even get one Syllable in Writing from her > this troubled me ; but 1 comforted myfelf, becaufe I faw, plainly that stie put herfelf to fome Constraint,, in order to obferve fuch cruel Appearances with me.
We Spent the Midnight - Mafs together, and We diverted ourfelves veryi agreeably ; Then New-TeaPs ^ay coming, I made Presents to all the Company, that I might have a Pretence to make one to her likewiSe. As
for
C ip ]
for the rest^ I came off for a Prayer-Book^ ^ Pair of Gloves, a Cane, or a Snussf-Box, but not fo with her ; befides a Pair of Gloves which I gave her in publick, I Sent her z very fine Striking-Watch, and a Letter, wherein I made not the least mention of Love.
I knew very well that it would be Seen, wherefore I only turned it ofif with a Jest ,* accordingly I wrote her Word, that there happening Difputes at her HouSe almost every Night, about leaving Play, which every one was willing to continue for the Benefit of the Society, and our Watches never agreeing together, it was proper, that we Sliould all for the future, be ruled by her; th^ no Body would make any Difficulty of trusting her, fince no Body made any Scruple of intrusting her with the Stock ot the Company,
My Letter was read publickly, and they obliged her to keep the Watch, which Ike would have return’d ; this was all that I defi-red. I delivered her another Letter, wherein I declared my Defign, and told her that '’twas indifferent to me whether we left off Play Sooner or later ; but that as I thought on her every Minute of the Day, I would oblige her to think of me, at least when stie wanted to fee what Hour it was. 1 begg’d her likewise to tell me when was the Critical Minute^ and defied an Astignation, which I pould not obtain.
[20]
^welfthAide being come, we Supp’d together thrice ; the Carnival pafs'd over, and notwithstanding the Liberty allow’d at that Seafoii, I was not a Jot the nearer ; however, although I was vex’d at this little Suc-ceSs, I was Sure of being belov’d. The Looks ilie gave me Srom Time to Time, confirmed to me what She had told me ; nevertheless I was not contented : But I met with Some Croffes, which Sorwarded my Wishes, more than any .Thing which I could have done.
My Father had taken Umbrage at my repeated Vifits at Mademoifelk de U ILpines* Be Said nothing thereof during the Winter^ nor the Ccirnwal; but finding that Lettt did not induce me to give over my Ashduities, he began to be afraid that the Mother, whom he knew to be very Self-interested, would prevail on me to take Some Step contrary to his Intentions. Not that he apprehended the ConSequences thereof, but he would not run the Hazard of being one Day obliged to get an Engagement Set afide, which he might prevent.
He began then by rallying me ; but Seeing that I still contiiiued my Vifits, he forbad my going there : I did not obey him, and Said : nothing of this Prohibition, either to the Mother, or the Daughter. Hereupon he took it in his Head, that ’twas the Mother who made me rebel against his Commands, far which he ow’d her a |^udge, and was with-
■V
[ 21 ]
in a little of playing her a Law-Trick, However he did not, but fatisSy’d himfelf with putting her in Fear thereoS ? for tho^ he is naturally cholerick and hasty, he has always been an upright Jud ge-
Accordingly, that Gentlewoman s Attorney furpriz’d her extremely, when he told her that my Father was greatly difpleaSed with her. She was defirous of knowing for what > for 'tis certain that when our At^fions are innocent, we never imagine that they are fush pedted. She inform’d me that very Evening what her Attorney had Said ; I knew very w^ell the Reafon, but took Care not to tell it her. The next Morning stie came to beg me to obtain her a Hearing ; She was a Stranger to what had given Offence h her Daughter and I had lived together with fo much Referved-nefs, and fo little Privacy had been obferved between us, that it was impofiible it fhouid have caufed any Suspicion, however I did not care for this coming to an Explanation: Wherefore I told her that my Father w^as not to be Spoken with, and that he was lock’d up about an Affair that would take him up a long Time. I then begg’d her to retstni Home, and not stir out, promiSing that I would enquire my Self, as alSo that I would fend her Word if She could poshbiy fpeak with him that Day.
As She was fin cere in her Intentions, She believed me^ and was about to retire ^ but as I
w^as ■
[ 22 ]
was leading her out, we met M. ^efprez Face to Face. He had gone out of his CloSet by a Back-Door, which open’d upon a Pair of Back-Stairs, and was returning thither again through the Court-Yard.
The Surprize wherein I appear’d at feeing him, confirm’d his Sufpicions : Wherefore, I fuppofe you did not want me. Madam, faid he, with fome Spite. Pardon me. Sir, an-fwer’d fhe, I came with Defign to beg to be inform’d in what — And I likewife, cried he, interrupting her, had a mind to talk with you, and ^tis not too late now j be pleas’d to walk intd my Clofet, I’ll tell you what 1 had to fay to you. She follow’d him, and I staid behind, rather dead theu alive.
I then drew near the Clofet-Door, whence I over-heard all. He accosted her very civilly at first, after which, he assfum’d the Tone of a Man who would be obey’d. I don’t in the least doubt. Madam, faid he, but you and your Family are as difcreet in Private as in Publick I I neither believe that you, or your Daughters, put on when you go abroad, that virtuous Air which I have always obferv’d in you, or that you leave it behind you at your Door, when you return home. I am fatisSy’d that the Regularity of your Houfe within, is as great, as ’tis to Appearance without Doors ,* neverthelefs my Son frequents your Houfe
every
»
C 23 ]
every Day, notwithstanding my exprefs Com* mands to the contrary.
I will not believe, that you are the Perfon^ who makes him defpife them, but the Publick is Scandaliz'd at So much Assiduity, and may charge you with Some Things that will do you no great Credit ,• prevent it, by forbidding ^efprez your Houfe, for I can% imagine you So fimple, as to believb that his frequent Vifits can be on any lawful Account:
And if any of your Daughters Should be So filly as to believe him, and to comply upon his Protestations, I astiire you it would be So much the worfe for her, that She will be the first deceiv’d, and the first that will repent her Eafinefs. I believe, as I have told you, that the Correspondence between them is innocent 3 but the World begins to talk, and that alone ought to oblige you to break it off.
Never was Surprize equal to that of Ma-dame de U Epine ; if She had follow'd her first Inclinations, She would have reSented it, by taking him up short, but she stood in need of his Interest, and that obliged her to Speak in a Softer Tone.
You discover to me. Sir, Said she, many Things which I have never yet obServ’d. I know not whether your Son has any Engagement at my HouSe ^ but I Swear to you, that if he has, I never perceiv’d it, and that thoSe who are Scandaliz’d thereat, certainly fee more clearly into my Affairs then mySelf. I
haw
I
I
L ^4 1
have only Suffer’d your Son’s Compaily^ be-caufe he is your Son, and might, as he has already, procure me the Means of Speaking to you about my BufineSs: He has been one of a Set-Company at Play, and that is the only ReaSon I know of his coming to my HouSe,
I know very well, that my Daughters are not for him, in a Country where all Marriages are diredfed by Interest alone ^ but I beg you would believe that I have, educated them too Well, to feartheir being Guilty of any Thing contrary to their Honour. Be So good, Sir, I conjure you, added fhe, as to tell me upon which of the three the Publick cast their Eyes. They name none, anSwered he, they make no Di-stindion between them, stis only his So frequent iVistts which they blame. Then their Suspicions are only Chm<eraSy reply’d fhe ; I promiSe you however. Sir, to put an End to them ; and this very Day I will defire him. Sir, no more to honour us with his Vistts ; And I will do it in Such a manner, as shall convince you that I did not draw them upon myfelf, on any account that could reasonably give you any
UneafineSs*
»
There is no need. Madam, Said he, of making ^ a Clamour • we must not drive People out of our HouSes with a Cudgel; the NoiSe you would make thereby, would give the World occafion to talk : They would Say you only' did it out of Spite ; a civil Way is more decent : She promis’d to according to his
Defire ^
[25]
Defire ; after which, he talkM with her about her curs’d Law-Suit, wherein he promis’d her all manner of Assistance, and began to keep his Word therein that very Day.
As their Difcourfe then was perfectly indifferent to me, I withdrew, without knowing what Resolution to take. If I went to her, I knew what Sortof a Compliment was to be expected ,• if I did not go, ’twas. the fame Thing as if Sentence had been already past’d upon me. However, I did not make my Appearance there ’till the next Day, before which I prepar’d a Letter for the Daughter, which I gave her without being Seen, and which was as follows.
TETTER.
Tour PreHUions.^ Madam^ hegm to he accomplijldd; and the Confiancy which 1 ha^e mzdd to you will foon become necejfary: I know the Compliment which your Mother is preparing for me; however^ I will not amid it to fDay^ becattfe fis impoffthle for me to live any longer without feeing yotu I fuffedd too much Tetter day., wherefore 1 re-. fign myfelf up to all the Horrors tf my T)e-Jiiny ^ the Order which I am foon to receive will he the Sentence of my Deaths hut I floall fee you at leaf hejore 1 die. What Troubles arife in my Soul! I¥hy did not 1 confer with you T'efierday! Ifhould have heggd you to con-
E	ceal
i'
i	[ 2« ]
! • ceal pur Sentiments I Iknowthem^ lut let
I	them not he difco'vered by others. Seem cruel ■ i! ' to mCj ceafe your obliging Glances^ treat me
j|, only with Indifference^ IJhallfufpeU the Mo-
II	twe^ and e'Very 'Body will be deceived therein. But hcld^ Ijhoiild dye with Grief before your Face, if I floould not ohferve Love and Fen-
\ derne/s therein j now is the Lime that AJJig-nations are neceffary r. your Eejerves are no ^ longer feafonabki make 7ne then fome Appoint-meittUs not my Bnfinefs to offer to prefaibe my to you. However I ffall he at Mafs to I Morrow at the Minims; id will begin with me ; abottt Light in the Mornings and will not end till long after Noon.
I
Having given her this Letter unfeen, as L faid before, I placed mySelf next her at Table,, according to Custom. All the Society were there^ and all the Society were informed of the Harangue that vvasto be made to me; wherefore they kept Silence for Some Time, and at last the Mother addrefs’d ire as follows.
You would have deceived me. Sir Said Slie, and have run the Rifque of ruining me in the good Opinion of M. Lefprez.^ of whom you know that I ought to make a Friend: I can’t fell what may have been your .Defign therein, but I am very Sure that you have bid very fair for my undoing, Yo-ur freq^uent Vifits here give him Umbrage ^ I know, by what he has faid to me^ that he is apprehenlive of the Con-
fequencs$ j
[ 27 ]
fe-qiiences: and I believe. Sir, that yoii will not take it ill if I prevent every Thing that may create me fuch an Enemy. Wherefore, although your Company does me a great deal of Honour, and more then your Father thinks I deferve; 1 must beg you not to give yourfclf that Trouble any more.
If I had never a Caufe depending, added fhe, with a fpiteSiil Air, and if my Law-Suit was decided, I Should not, perhaps, be So condescending to his Will: I confefs it to you, to the End that you may be Satisfy’d, ’tis contrary to my Inclinations that I defire you not to come hither any more; 'tis not errough that your Bdhaviour is innocent, it must appear likewife. This, Sir, continued She, is the Lecture that hath been preached to mej upon which I might give Some Admonitions to o-thers. They aScribe your Vifits to a Caufe that may do an Injury to the Reputation of my Daughters, of which I have as much, and yet more Reafon to be careful, then of T)efp rezs Good-Graces, although all their Fortune and Substance depends thereon ; Wherefore, Sir, you are too equitable to wish me ill, for a Thing, to which 1 am constrain’d on fo many Accounts.
I grant it. Madam, reply’d I ; my Father wouM certainly do you Some DifSer-vice, fince he has been fo free as to tell you fo : But I will not be the Caufe of any , Misfortunes happening to you. What drew me hither is, that stis impossible to ‘find
E 2	any
[ 28 ]
any where elfe Such an agreeable and well chofen Company as ours ^ I Shall quit it however, without bearing you any ill Will. I know that you are compelSd to it; wherefore, I protest to you, that I will not ceafe to be always the best Friend you have in the WTrld; and that you may depend upon me, when ’tis in my Power to do you any Service; but I must have “your PromiSe that you will not hate me. I don’t think that ever I my feif gave you any ReaSon ; and it is not just that 1 Should be punifhcd for my Father’s unreasonable Sufpicions. I would even have you permit me to alSure you Sometimes of my good i Wifliesi I will come So Seldom, that it Shall cauSe you no new Disturbance. This was granted me, and thus was I baniSh’d Mcide^ moifelle de U Epines ; but tho^ I did not See her every Day, my Affairs went on but So much the better.
vShc did not Sail coming next Morning to the Minims^ although She could stay no longer than to appoint me to meet her the next Morning, in a Church at the farthest Fnd of one of the Suburbs. Accordingly I went thither, and we staid together above three Hours, which did but render our Parting more grievous. At last I told her that it was impostible for me to live without Seeing her, and that if She would ; not take Pitty on my Condition, She might , expect to See me in a Convent, if my Sorrows I alone did not put gn End to my Life.
;i	. Sh®
c
‘ • I
|i'
!' ■
t 29 i
She anfwer’d me, that flie was in the very fame Condition herSelS; but, in short, faid I, thefe Sorrows, and thefe Afllidions, will only make both you and me more unhappy. We must conclude, fo many Assignations will be discover’d, unlefs they are in Some private Place, which Place can only be a Chamber; and if you should enter it any otherwife then as my Wife, you may happen to be known, and that would be the dreadfullest of Misfortunes. Come to a Resolution, purSued I;
I am of Age to difpofe of myfelf: If my Father's Effate is in his own Power, altho’ he I has been able to get me banish'd from your -HouSe, my Mothers P'ortune, with the Dish poSal of my Heart and Vows, are entirely at I my own DiScretion : Accept the Means which I offer you, of being united to each other, without its being in the Power of any one to ^ prevent us.
What are the Means you propofe ? laid I she; provided my Honour may be lafe, and I may believe myfelf innocent; I will run !l any other Rifque. Th be married, replsh Vcd I, without any one's knowing it but the Priest, and the Witnessfes that will be neGefiary.
SBe it So, cry'd she, I will conSent to whatever ^ou pleaSe, and if I must be unhappy either “Way^ I had rather be fo by Sacrificing all to fyou: I cannot avoid my Destiny; however ftiiolent your Love may be to me, it is by no imeans equal to that which i bear you. I af-
Sure
t
[	30	]
:■}
lure yoti of it without Hefitatlon, to the End that you may justify to your Self my Complah fance and EafineSs, in complying with all the Steps which you are going to exa(st of me; and ' which I Should not have taken, but through the Instigation of a Pastion, whereof I am not Mistrefs.
You Shall not repent, my dear Magdalen.^ faid I, kisting her Hand; of any Meafures wherein I Shall engage you ; I will give you an Anfwer as Soon as all Things are in Rea-dineSs; you may even declare to your Mother our Sentiments for each other. I Shall take Care of that, cry’d She, interrupting me, we ou^ht to distrust her more than any one whatever j the Fear of lofing her Law-Suit, would oblige her to Sacrifice me, and I Should Soon he in a Convent. But how Shall we do to feel each other, faid I, if no Body astists us there-! in ? Time and Opportunity, anfwer’d She, wil| provide for that: But what is your DefignJ what are you going to do ? I will inform yoUji reply'd I, when I have given Orders for everjij thing ; rely upon me, I am too much in Love) not to be as impatient as postible, and I wilf lofe no Time in hastening our Happinefs. Bu| after what manner, continued I, Shall I convey my Letters to your Hands, and receiv^ your Anfw^ers ?	|
That is not the most difficult Point, Saidj She, I have consider'd upon it: When you have any Letter for me, have Recourfe to no^
Confi'i
(
V
[9']
Confidant, convey it to me your Self. How, refum’d I ? It must be as Seldom as poIEble, reply’d She, that we may not run the Hazard of being discover’d. In order then to give me Notice thereof^ make a white Mark on the Wall that is before my Windows ; that will Serve me as a Signal, I will open my CaSe-ment, and at Night, en paffant^ you may throw your Letters therein with Safety. I will take with me the Key of my Chamber, and no Body (hall enter therein but my Self, or, at least, I will manage So as to be the first to observe what you have thrown there.
'As for my AnSwers, it ^ill require a little more Exa6tnefs ^ when I have any to make, either by Word of Mouth, or Writing, my Flower-Pot shall be in the Window towards the Ramparts; if ’tis on the other Side, don’t expect any. When you know that you are to expect a Letter, you must be under my Window at Night punctually, when the Clock strikes Eleven, whether there is a Light or .. not, and take up whatever I throw out; very few People pafs by at Such an unSeaSonable Hour : Befides, I will look whether you are there or no. Thus will you hear from me with Safety.
After this Conversation, I return’d to my Father’s, in whoSe Countenance I obServ’d a malicious Satisfaction: However, I did not Seem to take any Notice thereof,- and becauSe 1 imagin’d that he would have roe dogg’d, I
was
►
[ 32 ]
was above a Week without feeing my Mist rest, and neverthelest I staid at Home lefs then be- | fore.	!
My Precaution was not in -vain ,* I was dogg’d indeed, and gave Notice thereof to | Mademoifelle de Id Epine^ to the End that fhe might not be alarm’d at my Silence. I had observ’d the fame Face three or Sour times in
■y
my Way ^ I did not Seem to take Notice thereof, but in order to fee whether ’twas actually an additional Retinue, I Sent away a Footman that I had with me, on Pretence of Some Errand.
This was at the yefuids Convent y wherefore, as foon as I faw him at a little Distance, I whipt into a Hackney-Coach^ as if I had a mind to hide my Self, and made it, stop at the Eauxhourg St, Germain^ near the Hotel des Moiifquetaires^ where I had a Coufin-German. 1 found him there, and yet more than I defi-red ,* he told me that there was a Company engaged to go and dine at Meudon,, and that it ihould be my Fault if I did not make one of them. I accepted his Offer ; and faw my Gentleman who had follow’d me, at a Tavern Door, Ihewing me to another j however, I -made as if I did not perceive it.
We got then into a Coach, and went to the Eendezvotis^ where we made a compleat Debauch ; there I obferv’d the fame Man who had been fliown me by his Comrade ^ and a little after my Return Home, I faw tlie fame
Spark
t 33 ]
Spirk come thither whom I had Seen at the yefuits. I was greatly teinpted to have paid my Gentleman his Hire, but thought it would be more for my Advantage to take no Notice of him.
I ask*d the Porter, however, who he was; who told me, that all he knew of him, was, that he came to our Houfe in the Morning about Ten, and that he had Spoken to my Father i who not knowing where I was in the Afternoon, went to vifit Madame de U Dpine : Fortunately for me, he found her working of Tapestry, with all her Daughters.
This made me yet more circumSpedt, I wrote Word thereof to my Mistrefs, to the End that file fiiould not be furpriz*d at feeing me So long without thinking on what I had promis’d her. She acquainted me, in Anfwer, with the al-■ together extraordinary Vifit which they had receiv’d from my Father, who, in all Probability, imagin’d that we were together. She • recommended Secrefy to me above all Things, and to take Such just Meafures that we might have nothing to fear.
The rest was nothing but Afiurances of a constant Love ^ and a ThouSand other Things that v/ould be but Trifles to indifferent Persons, but are of the greatest Importance to People who love each other. I study’d my CondiKst then all the rest of Denty and the JEafter Holyays ^ that is to Say, almost-two Months} and I Succeeded So well, that
F "	all
'i
«	f
»
[ 34 ]
ctl Siifpicion was at an End, and they na longer dogg’d me : Then I put the Irons in the Fire, to crown my Wishes.
I had often obferv’d a Man at our HoiiSe, who came thither to write for my Fathers Secretary ; he Seem’d to me to be for my PurpoSe i his Countenance pleaSed me, and I was in hopes he would be Serviceable : Wherefore I order’d him to be brought to me when he should come next. He came,^^ and in order to begin to enter upon BufineSs, I gave him Some Love-Letters to trail Scribe which were in Vogue at that Time, and'recommended SecreSy- Next Day I went to his HouSe, although I knew very well th^t he could not have finilh’d what I had given him, not having promis’d it ’till two Days after : Neither was that my Intention in going thither, but only to fee whether his HouSe was convenient for my Defign,
I found it was, both becauSe it was large, and neat enough, and becaiiSe it was in a very remote and unfrequented Part of the City : I even Saw Bills Set up, whicli show’d that* there were Rooms to Lettthis was just wshat I wanted. The Man was very much Surpriz’d at Seeing me ; and the Wretched-Jiefs of his Furniture having convinced me of his great Poverty, I Sent for Som.eching for Breakfasts and, on Pretence of paying him for what he had already written, gave him a little Prefent, which gain'd him entirely over to
my
[ ?5 J
my Interest, for my Familiarity had already gone a great Way towards if. ThisMan had a Wife, who Seem’d to me to be a Woman of Intrigue, and not very Scrupulous; to her then I refolv’d to unbolbrn mySelf. I went away, however, for that Time, as I came, leaving behind me a good Opinion of my Ge-nerofity, as I found when I returned thither.
This was two Days after ; 1 had Seen the Man at my Father’s, wherefore, knowing that he would not be at Home, I went thither, on Pretence of having the Writings I had given him to tranScribe. His Wife was preparing to go and look for them, but I hinder’d her, and told her, that having nothing to do, I would wait for him, and chat with her in the mean While. I Sent again for Somewhat to Breakfast, and obliged her to eat with me, notwithstanding that she made Some Difficulty to do it ; I got rid then of my Footman, by fending him Home to tell the Man that I was waiting for him.
If this Woman had been young, or hand-fome, I Should not have done fo, but I was not aSraid of being fufpedled, She was too old and too homely to bring my Prudence in Question. She did not want for Wit ; that was as much I defired ; I only talk’d with her at first of Thin gs fuitable to her Condition : She complain d mightily of the Badnefs of the Times, and told me that her Husband and
F 3	stie
[ ]
fhe could hardly earn any thing, and had much ado to live.
That is to fay, anfvverM I laughing, that if you could find any Way, to get a good Sum without running any Rifque, you would not let it flip. No, certainly, replyed She, with , a certain Air, which convinced me that She fpoke from the Bottom of her Heart. Are you capable of Secrefy, purfued I ? Yes, refumed she, my Tongue never yet did me any Hurt. That is Somewhat wonderful in a Woman, Said I, laughing. Heark you, continued I, with a Serious Air, heark you, if this be true, and you are of a Humour to do a Service to PerSons who stand in need of it, I will affure you of a Prefent of Fifty Lobtis d OVy as foon as the Affair is finish’d, and a Penfion of twenty Crowns a Month for a very long Time ; and yet you shall neither offend God, nor Man, in what I demand ? the only Thing required is Secrefy.
At theSe Words, I law a lively Joy Sparkle in this Woman’s Eyes, which Seem’d to me lincere ; she Swore to me that if it was fo, I might explain myfelf more openly. Hereupon, I made her take an .Oath that, whether flie in ga ged therein or not, she would never divulge what I was going to fay to her ; accordingly she did bind herSelf by all the Oaths which I was pleafed^to require of her, and ihe has not violated them ; for my Father
does
V ti
C 37 ]
4oes not yet know that either (he, or her Husband, were concern’d in the Intrigue.
I then declar’d to her, that I was the Per^ Son to whom Ihe must be astisting ; that I lov'd a young Lady pastionately, but that my Father would never conSent that I Should marry her, becaufe Ihe was not rich, although She was of a very good Family: That this young Lady likewiSe return’d my Affection, but that Ihe had too much Love ever to grant me any Thing contrary to her Duty ; that besides her own Mother would not con-fent to our Marriage, for the Reafbns which I have just told you, and whereof I inform’d this Woman; In Short, purfued I, we want to be married, without any one’s being privy to it; She is a Minor, but I am of Age : We want a Chamber where we may meet when we pleaSe, and this Chamber must be referv’d for us alone: We must like wife be aSfured of Secrefy, not only on account of my Father’s Anger against me, but alfb becaufe the Dif-.covery would prove the Ruin pf her, her Mother, and her whole Family. This, faid I, is what we want; now consider whether you will be assistant to us therein.
Have you thought well, anfweFd this Wo-;nan, on what you are going to undertake ? As to your Marriage, it feems to me very difficult; for what Parish Priest in Paris.^ will run the Venture of joining your Hands ? To be married at the Bishop’s Court will be
yet
[ 38 ]
yet worfe ; L)efprez Would be acquainted therewith that very Day. As for the Chamber, that is a Trifle, it Should be left to your felf to take what Precautions you pieafe not to be Surpris’d. But how is it possible to blind the Eyes of a Mother, as to her Daughter's Conduct? Can Slie have Time to come to your Rendezvous without giving any Sufpi-cion ? And can She help all's being difcover'd if She Sliould prove with Child ? And that would certainly happen ; for a Woman that , loves, does not admit the Embraces of a Man long, without carrying Some Marks thereof.
You give me very Surprizing Reafons, Said I, and you ask me as Surprizing Questions. As to our Meetings, it will depend on our Discretion to appoint the Times. There is no Such Thing, reply'd Ihe, turning afide her Head, when People are in Love, AVe Shall have ibme, refum'd I, don't you trouble your Self about that, fince we have had Prudence enough to prevent any Perfon living's Suf-pe<sting that we have the least extraordinary Kindnefs for each other. If (he proves with Child, adds I, her Mother shall be inform'd thereof, there will no longer be any Danger on her Side ; and my Wife may lie in the Same Chamber where we meet before: One may pretend a Journey into the Country; or to retire into a Convent. Dwell no more upon that, Said she, I grant it.
The
• ' »
[39]
The only Difficulty that remains then, pur-Sued I, is the Marriage : Aye, replyM fhe, but that is all in ail. As to the BiSliop’s Court, Said I, nothing has pafVd between us that can come under their Cognizance 3 be-fides this, it does not Seem to me to be a creditable Method : As lor the Parish Priests of ParisI won't defire the Assistance of any of them, my Father would be Soon inform’d thereof. After what manner then will you 20 about it, faid she ? We must have a Priesh anfvverd I, that will marry us in private; we will not fo much as ask him fora Certificate. But, fays the Woman, this Priest will not have Authority to marry you, and this Marriage will be fet afide. - How hasty are you, re fum’d I ? We don’t defire our Marriage to appear Good in the Eyes of Men, fince we don’t even require a Certificate; The young Lady, of whom I am fpeaking, only defires to fet her Confcience at EaSe before God, by an effeilual Nuptial Benediction, and for the rest, she relies upon my Fidelity.
Well then, fays she, what need is there of fo much Ceremony ? Deceive her; you will find it very hard to meet with a real Priest, and you may have a Thoufand who will difguife themfelves in a Priest’s Habit. I am not a Profl igate, anSwered I, quite astonish’d at her Propofal ; and I will not render myfeif abominable in the Eyes of God, by an infamous Sacrilege. If she will be actually marry’d
to
.•4
[ 40 ] _
to me^ t will be actually joined iri Wediddk to her, not only for my own Satisfaction, and the Eafe of my Con Science, blit alfo in order to be restrain’d within Bounds, by the Refpect of a real Sacrament.
You are very much in the right. Said fhe, to take Precautions against yourfelf ; this Lady must love you very well, to refign her-Self up to you upon fuch stender Security* But do you think that you stiall love her long ? ,Yes, reply'd I, and I will anSwer for it. You will be the only One then of your Sex, Said ^e, turning afide her Head; Marriages of this Kind, that are patch’d up only for Love, are but for a Time, and I will engage, in leSs than two Months, you will be cloy’d with it j or elfe God has made you of another Sort of Stust then the rest of Mankind.
Don’t offer to talk after this Manner to my Mistrefs, when you fee her, faid I; if you ; ^ do, you won’t pleafc me very well. Fear nothing, cry’d Ihe laughing; although I fhould fay a thoufand Times more to her then I have to you, it would be only fo much Labour lost : Far from perSuading her to believe me, I Should make her my Enemy ; a .Woman in Love confults only her own Heart, and her Lover.
Undoubtedly you know this by Experience faid I. That may be, anfwer’d flie laughing, I was formerly worth looking after. But, in Sliort, added I, are you difpofcd to be Serviceable
I	'
[ 41 ]
viceable to us ? With all my Heart, faid fhe, although I fee very plainly to what Dangers I expofe my Self. 1 Swear to you, in my Turn, cry’d I, an inviolable SecreSy, with the strictest Fidelity; and that whatever happens to my Wife, or me, you fhall never be brought into Trouble, neither shall any one know that you have been assistant therein.
I hope fo, faid she, and believe that I have just pitch'd upon Such a Priest in my Head as we want; I will fee him this very Day, and to Morrow you shall know what , we have done together,- give but yourfelf the Trouble to pafs this Way. I promis’d her I would ,* and here, added I, putting Ten Louis d Or in her Hand, here is for the Secrefy you have vow'd to me ; that shall do no Prejudice to the rest, for the Service I expect from you. This faid, I went away, very well Satisfy’d with having found a Woman of Intrigue, and having gain’d her over to my Interest.
I gave an account of all my Proceedings to Mademoifelle de Id Lpine^ and defir’d her to meet me, in order to be inform’d of the Anfwer which this Woman was to give me next Morning at Nine o’clock, when I was to call at her HouSe for that Purpofe. Accordingly I went thither on the fame Pretence' of Writing, which had carry’d me thither the Time before. Her HusbanTwas then there, she had inform’d him of every Thing, and
G	’twas
[ +2 ]
^twas not without the greatest Difficulty in the World, that he confented to what his Wife was to do j* neither was it ’till after Some Time, that I prevail’d on him to comply.
This done, his Wife told me that Ihe had Spoken to the Priest, as She had promiSed, but that he would not engage himfelf to do any Thing before he had talk’d with me, and that if I pleaSed, stie would go and Setch him ; that whatever happen’d, I might trust to his Discretion, and be Sure of his Secrefy, be-cauSe that, befides her having Spoken to him under the Seal of Confession, She had not told the Names of the Parties concern’d, and that not knowing me, I might appear before him with the greatest Safety ; that if he consented, the Thing was done at once, and if he did not, we Should be but just as we were ; that, as for the rest, he was a very poor Priest, Such as Normandy furniShes her Neighbours with in great Numbers ;. but that neverthelefs he was a good Clergyman, and a very honest Man. I Sent then for Somewhat to Breakfast ,• and above all, for Some choice Wine, becauSe I was willing to put the Priest into a good Humour, after which, I delired her to fetch him.
xVccordingly She went, and brought him with her ; this, Siry faicl She, is the Gentleman, presenting him to me, you may now confer together about your Affairs as long as you plcafte. We went then into ani empty.: . , / ^	‘	Chamber
t 43 1
Chamber on the fame Floor, Whereof this Woman had the Key ; this Chamber was to let, and was that which shas fince ferv’d my Wife and me, for our private Interviews. As Soon as we were left to our Selves, I broke Silence : 'Tis no PurpoSe, Sir, Said I, to repeat to you, the Motive that brings me here, the Mistrefs of the Houfe must have told you* ’Tis true. Sir, anfvvered he, She has Spoken to me about Somewhat ; but as Women do not uSually explain themSelves very well, I beg you to inform me of it yourfelf.
I thought the best Explanation would be to talk to him about the Money ; wherefore I only told him the whole Superficially, after which. Showing him what was in my PurSe ; this, purSued 1, is the Matter in Hand ; if you will, it is yours ; if you refuSe it, So much the worfe for you ^ Fifty Louts cT Or are not to be had every Day with So much EaSe, and So little Hazarcl. He anSwer’d, that before we came to that, it was proper to agree upon Matters of Fa6t ^ after which, he enter’d upon a Sermon which was So much the more tireSome, as he was not a good Preacher. He read me a Ledture then upon the Obedience which Children owe to their Parents, stiow’d me the Misfortunes that had happen’d to thofc who had fail’d therein, and quoted to me, tin Seasonably enough, what he knew of Sacred and profane History, all as the Ciir-Scs of God upon Difobedience. In Short, I
G 2	began
[ 44 i
began to be heartily tired in good Earnest, when Word was brought, that we might fit down to Breakfast ♦when we pleas’d j upon which I took him by the Hand, and led hitn thither.
He was not ufed to a good Table, for he eat with a prodigious Appetite what was fet before him, which, however, was no great Rarity, and drank but thrice, and that Wine and Water : I never Saw a Man eat So heartily, and drink So little. This put him, however, in another Humour : He began his Sermon again indeed, but he took another Text, which was the Affedion married People ought to bear to each other. Herein he met with better Succefs ; I join’d with him, and St. Paul was then quoted with great Sincerity on both Sides. I gave him to understand that I knew very well to what Marriage obliged us, and that if I did not behave myfelf well in that State, it would not be through Ignorance. I vow'Tan eternal Love and Affedion to my Spoufe, and, in Short, at last I prevail’d on him to comply.
He told me, that he would not only join our Hands, but even that he would give us a Certificate of Marriage, on Condition that we would both do, for our mutual Security, what he Should require of us ; that we Should both of us draw up a mutual Promife, Sign’d and written by our Hands, before him, and of his didating, whereby we fhould engage
our-
[ +5 ] ,
oiirfelves one to another, to re<5i:ify by a new Ceremony, if need Should be, whatever should be found defective in *this which we were going to celebrate, and that as Soon as we could do it, without expofing oiirfelves to the Inconvehiencies which obliged us to Secrefy ; that thefe, Inconveniencies should be recited in our PromiSes ; that we should Seal thefe PromiSes by the Confession of our Sins, and by dn Oath before him, to hold good and valid the Sacrament which he should confer upon us; that thefe two PromiSes should be fign’d not only by us, but by him and the "Witneffes who should fee us married, after the Blestlng, and before the Consummation; that the Promife fign’d by me, should remain in her Hands i that it Should be Seal’d with my Seal, and that upon the Cover I should acknowledge before Notaries, that what wa§ therein inclofed, contain’d a Declaration of my pure and free Wdl. Far from being dif^ pleas’d with him for all thefe Precautions, I return’d him Thanks, and promis’d him to do whatever he pleas’d to defire, and to make my Spoufe conSent thereunto likewife.
This being reSolv’d on in this manner, we appointed to meet next Morning at Nine o’clock, in the fame Chamber ; and in order to engage him the more to keep his Word, I gave him /Part of what was in my Purfe. The rest I gave to our Landlady, to provide us Furniture, and there not being enough,
took
[ 4« 3
9
took her Husband Home with me to Supply him with more. I charg’d her to buy what She could find most genteel, and agreeable to the Eye ^ and gave her a Memorandum of Svhat NecelSaries were wanting, that nothing might be forgot, and She discharged her Trust very well, for the next Day I found the Chamber very neatly Set off.
I was at a LoSs how to inform Mademoi-felle de U Epine of what I had done, as well as of the Appointment which I had made for her next Morning ; however, She had thought for both of us. Accordingly, just I was ready to enter our HouSe, 1 met a poor Woman, who, as file was asking me Alms, Showed me a Bit of Paper, which She made ' Signs for me to take. I did So, and having paid her handSomcly for the Carriage, read it, and found only theSe Words: Lie at Ehree dClock at the fame Place where we met together lafl Eime. I did not question one Moment whence this Note came, wherefore I went exadtly at that Hour to the fame Church in the Suburbs.
I thought at first I had lost my Labour, becaufe 1 found it Shut i but, turning my Head about, I Saw her making Signs to me to go on. 1 waited for her then at the Corner of a narrow Street, and told her that if She pleafed, I would condiKst her to a Place where we might diScourSe as long as we pleas'd, and in Safety : She refus'd me at first, but having
in-
[ 47 ]
inform Vi her what it was, fhe confented. We had each of us Sent away the Hackney-Coach which had brought us; wherefore lead’d another, which carried us to our Chamber ,♦ we went up to it, a Child gave us the Key, and I carried thither two Chairs.
At last, my dear Child, Said I tosher, we Shall Soon be join’d together ,* you are now in the Chamber which Thall be WitneSs to the happy Conclusion of our Loves. Yes, pur-fued I, falling at her Feet, here Vis that I hope to be foon able to fay, that I am the happiest of Mankind, in poSSeSIIng ail that the Earth boasts most lovely.
Rife up, faid stie, with Tears in her Eyes,' I defire only your Satisfaction ^ but much I fear that for my Part it wail have a fatal Catastrophe. Alas i continued She, why has Fortune made lb much Difference between us. Since Heaven unites us ? I forefee that, in striving to compieat your Happinefs, I Shall only do the contrary.
I endeavouCd to put all thefe fatal Prestiges out of her Mind ; and fhe no more discover’d any of them to me ; but it is very certain that the Forebodings of her Heart always threaten’d her with the Misfortune that has befallen her, and with the melancholy Condition to which her Lofs has reduced me for the Rest of my Days. At thefe Words, the Tears came afreSh into the Eyes of Def-prezat last he refum’d his DifcQurfe.
liar
[ 48 ]
I inform'd her of all that I had done ; and telling her that I had given my Word for her being there, begg'd her to tell me if I had gone beyond her Orders, and if She was vex’d that I had in gaged her So far. She anfweFd,' that Ihe had but one W ord, that She would-do just what I pleafed, and that fhe would not fail to meet me next Day at the Place where we then were. She farther faid, that the Letter I had thrown into her Window the Night before, had made her fo impatient, that fire was reSoiv’d to fpeak to me that very Day; that to that End, llie got the Note written wshich had been given me, and that fhe gave to a poor Woman, with Orders to . deliver it into my own Hands, promifing her^ that befides what I fhould give her, fhe would pay her well for the Carriage, and that fhe would give her as much more the next Day, if fhe did not fail, which fhe Should know by the Anfwer.
I inquired then how fhe would do for the future, to meet me at the Times when I Should appoint her. Don't perplex yourfelf about that, faid fhe, I do my own Bulinefs, and will not mifs one Appointment, as foon as you Seem to defire it. Do you hope, refum'd I, that your Mother will leave you entirely to your ov/n Difcretion ? Yes, I do hope it, reply*d She, and fince you will know how, I must tell you. I will not have her apprized of what we are ^bout at prefent 5 but, as foon as -	■	.... ”	it
k.
[ 49 ]
it is a done Tiling, She fliall be acquainted therewith* You are at Age, there is nothing to be fear'd on that Side ; llie would prevent our concluding it, becauSe Slie would.not run the Hazard of having any Difference with M LIefprez., whom Sue fears, and whom Slie don’t love ; she is still shock'd at his Compliment, which she will never forget. But when we have concluded our Affairs without
A	'
her, she will be the first to lend us her AS-fistance to conceal our Marriage, for fear that if it should be discover’d, your Father should accuSe her of having contrived it, and should revenue himfelf upon her for the Vexation it would caufe him*
. I agree to what you Say, anSwer’d I, but will she think our Marriage Good; will she approve of the Formalities and Ceremonies ? If our Marriage is not Good, Said she, I will not conSent neither. But did not voii tell me.
j	•	j
added she, that the Priest who is concern’d, takes all manner of Precautions ? Yes, reply’d L Well, refum’d she, that is what makes me fay that our Marriage being valid, it will be to no Purpofe to conceal it from her. But . did not you promife me, faid I, that you would bestow yourfelf on me, provided that your Conscience might be at Eafe. I promife it you again, anfwered she ; if there was no Body but myfelf whom this Marriage was to Satisfy, I should not be fo very exadt; and, on the contrary, if my Mother can be fatif-
H	fy'd
E ]
fy’d alfo, I promife you herinterefi: entirely : The Marriage would be Good, with relation to me, provided that he who gives us the Nuptial Bleshng, is actually a Priest; I ask no more for my Part: But, as for my Mother, Vis quite another Thing ^ you know what I mean ; I refign myfelf up entirely to you ; I am contented with being your Spoufe before God, and I leave you at Liberty to make me pafs for a Wretch before Men.
No, anSwer’d I, falling a Second Time at her Knees, you fhall not be deceiv’d, I will not abuSe your Confidence, you Ihall be my Wife both before God and Man > Death alone iliall tear us from each other. I hope So, Said she, I have too good an Opinion of you, to fear that you would ever abandon me ^ or if you should do it, I should, at least, have the melancholy Pleaftire to fee you break through the Solemn Tyes of a Sacrament, which the most reprobate refpect ^ and at the worst, if I Seem Criminal in the Eyes of Men, I shall believe mySelf innocent be^ fore God.
In the mean while, the Mistrefs of the Houfe return’d from making her PurchaSes, being follow’d by Porters loaden with the Things she had been buying for us, whereof we did not Seem to take any Notice. She Saw my Mistrefs, extoll’d her Beauty, and launch’d out into Commendations of her Charms, like a Woman who was a good
Judge
C 51 J
Judge In fuch Affairs. We then had a ittle Collation there, which done, she went away, after having promifed to meet me the next Morning at Nine,- in the fame Place: I follow’d foon after, having first given Orders for a Breakfast in Form.
We came to the Rendezvous almost at the fame Instant, where she found her Chamber very neat, and in very good Order for fuch a little Time ,♦ and indeed every Thing was well chofen. After that we had examin’d every Thing, I defin’d our Landlady to go and fetch the Priest for whom we waited. Whilst she went thither, I remain’d alone with Mademoifelle de U Epine^ who fell again into her Apprehenfions; I obServ’d it by a melancholy Air, which oveiTpread her Face, and the Tears which stood in her Eyes.,
Have you still any Thing upon your Spirits which astlids you, my dear Child, Said I ? In God’s Name take Part in my Joy 1 I shall not reliOi it entirely if you don’t share it with me. I do partake of it as much as I can, anfwer’d she, but I can’t help thinking of the Future, and I confefs that terrifies me. But let not that give you any Trouble, added she, for it is only for you that I fear : As to myfelf, I take no Thought about what relates to me, and provided you are happy, if it be true, as you fay, that you place your
H 2	Hsp-
[ 52 ]
Happinefs in the Enjoyment of me, I toll never repent of all that I have done for you.
I fnall never be happy, reply’d I, unleSs you be happy likewife, be allured thereof; and although my whole Happinefs is in Effedfc wrapt up in your Perfoii, and your PolSesti-on, I would willingly renounce both, if I fear’d that it would cost you the least Sorrow in the End. I am very well Satisfy'd. Said She, that thofe are your real Sentiments at prefent ,* I am even Sure, added ihe, languilh-ingiy, at least I think I ought to be So, that my Misfortunes will never proceed from you, peither will you contribute to them , but I cannot fancy to mySelf that ever I was born to be happy. Nevertheless, whatever MiS-
s me, I will never accuSe you thereof, I will only accuSe the Inclination that hurries me away, and the Planet that reign’d at rpy Nativity. She could not make Rcfle(5tions of this Nature, without being bath’d in Tears and altho’ I did all I could TO difpel them, I could not help being mov’d therewith mySelf.
At last the Priest, for whom v/e v/aited, came, with whom we staid alone above an Hour} and as he (aw a Lady who was not only perfectly beautiful, as I had told him, but who, contrary to his Expectation, was very-well dreSs’d, and whoSe PreSence inspired ReSpetst, :f£’d nothing but what was ,yery good SenSe,,^nd extremely civil,. He made
us
[53]
%
ps a little Exhortation, that was very just, on the Engagement into which we were going to enter; and fhow’d us that it was,to us the Scripture Spoke, when it Says, Lha'f a Man mttft lea<ve all for bis Wife ^ and a Woman.y reciprocally, for her Hush and; that we were obliged to Sollow thofe Words literally, much more then other married People. In effed, Said he, thofe whoSe Marriages are made by their Parents, have Some ReaSon to complain of them, when they are not So well Satisfy’d with their State as they hoped to be : They may Say to them, ^tis you who have phoSen me a Wife, or a Husband ; ;yoii are reSponSable tome, for his, or her ill Humour and Conduct ,• if I had choSen for myfelf, T Should have been better, and I ihouid-live contented : But you would have me refer my Self to your Choice, and my Compliance with your Commands, costs me the whole Peace pf my Life ,• and v/ill, perhaps, cost me ray eternal Happinefs, through the Sins wshich I am made to commit, by the Chain which binds me to a Perfon whom I cannot love, and whoSe Temper, which is c]uite contrary to mine, makes our Family a lively Picture of Hell, by reafon of the perpetual.DiScord that reigns there.
You are not in this Cafe, added he, addressing himSelf to us ; you chooSe each other ,• you must reSoive never to leave each other. You, Sir, Said he, to me, take this
Lady
[ 54 ]
Lady who has not a Fortune equal to yoiirs ,* it is but a worldly Consideration which engages you to Secrefy; thefc Riches are nothing in the Eye of God, but the Sacrament will be always a Sacrament; it would not be her you would deceive, it would be yourfelf ,* you would not mock God with Impunity: iWhereSore you must refolve to run with her all the Hazards into which you draw her, and never abandon her let what will happen.
As for you. Madam, purfued he, fpeaking to her, you give yourfelf to this Gentleman ; you know to what a Woman of Honour is obliged j but, befides Fidelity and Obedience, you are obliged to a thoufand other Duties, to which others are not bound. The Love which this Gentleman has for you, induces him to efpoufe you ; confider that his Love is nothing, and that it will foon vanish, un-lefs it be fortify'd on your Part, by a Conduct entirely fubmistive, prudent, and virtuous ; as alfo by an abfoiute devoting yourfelf to his Will.
You are fo much the more obliged to cherish this Love, and to maintain yourfelf in his Esteem, becauSe the least falfe Step in your Behaviour, and the least Caufe of Complaint that you may chance to give him, would feem in his Eyes irreparable, and unpardonable Grimes. He may think himfelf justified, in defpifing at the fame Time both your Per-fon and the Sacrament, wherein, perhaps, he
would
C $5 ]
\^ould be Supported by the Laws of Man* kind: In fhort, he argued very justly, and made no Ceremony of Dining with us, it being too late for Breakfast. During our Re* past then we were very merry, and our Landlady, whofe Husband was abroad, waited upon ^ us at Table.
After Dinner, he made each of us write a Promife of Marriage, or rather a very long Recognizance, which is certainly well-drawn up, and would, I believe, have been allow'd Good in Law : They were entirely the fame, only the Names were tranfpofed. We then vow’d an inviolable Secrefy, after which, I ask’d him when he would give us his Blef-fing. He told us, that he would not give it us ’till we had both been at Mafs, and at Confeflion to him, which done, it should be when we pleafed. There was no Words to be made about it, for it was stipulated in the Promife of Marriage. Hereupon we appointed a Day to confefs, I the next Morning, and she the Sunday following, and the Monday after, at Six in the Morning, to join our Hands : He promis’d to wait for us in his Church, and took his Leave.
Mademoifelle de Id JEpine and I, being then left to our Selves, she told me that this Priest feem'd to her a Perfon of good Senfe, and a very honest Man, wherefore she believ'd that her Mother would have nothing to alledge against what we were doing. In Effect,
only
[ 5« ]
only that the Laws of the Prince .wel*e not observed, by the publishing the Banes, and the registring it in the Parilh-Books ; the rest was agreeable to the iifual Forms, and it could not be Said that our Marriage was not valid.
' As to my Wife, She Seem’d to be very well fatisSy’d in her Mind, and having look’d over the Chamber from one End to the other, was highly pleas’d therewith. I told her then I had promis’d Fifty JLouis cf Or to our Landlady, and at the Same Time obliging her do take a Purfe of Money, I bid her pay her Share.
Hereupon She call’d her, and making her take av-ay what was left at Dinner, I am very well pleas’d. Said She, with the Furniture you have houulit, and thank you for your Care :
rez has promised you Fifty Louis cf that is five and twenty each, here is my Share. The Woman having taken them with Some little Difficulty ,* I fore fee, purSued Mademoijelle de Lf FPine^ that we shall dine here on Monday^ wherefore I will defray the Charges ,• here, take this Moneys and entertain us well, it is to be my Wedding-Day, and I must be merry : The Woman promis’d nothing flrould be wanting, and went away.
Being again left alone with her, I preL’d her in vain to anticipate my Happinefs ; No, no, laid she, you shall not triumph in that
mariner
[ 57 ]
hiastncf over thy Weaknefs : As I Saw therefore that it would be only lolng my Time, I did not in fist upon it any longer. 1 ask’d her then how flie would do to meet me at our Rendezvous, especially on Monday.^ when Slie would be abroad perhaps the whole Day. I will go, Said She, on Sunday to Church with one of my Sisters^ and from thence I will make a Vifit to a Lady, who is a very good Friend both of my Mother’s and mine, and will beg her to fend for me that very Evening to take the Air Some where out of Paris* I know very well that she will not go j but nevertheless that will be a Pretence for me to go out on Monday Morning, and I will tell that Lady that I have a mind to go to Mount Ti?-lerian^ but that I could not obtain Leave.
The Lady, I am Sure, will do me this Service j at the Worst, I shall come off with being chid my by Mother, as I have been a Thoufand Times about Trifles, and this Oc-cafion richly deferves that I Ihould run the Venture once, tho’ it were on Purpofe. Be it as it will, continued flic, I won’t fail to be tliere ; this Said, v/c embraced, and flie went Home.
I Sent then for a Lock-Smitb, whom I order’d to make a Lock with three Keys ^ to the End that my Wife, my Landlady, and myfelf, might have each of us one ; and as it was early, and our I.andlord was re-turn.’d, I staid Some Time with him. I pro-
1	mi fed
^ ■
[ 5^ ]
raifed to Serve him, and to procure him 2 fettled Employment, which I have done, and by God’s Help, will take Care of his For-^ tune as long as I live. Hereupon, his Wife^ being Senfibly affeded with Gratitude, and with the Beauty of my Suture SpouSe; was never weary of extolling her Charms. She conceived Such a Love for her, that there is no Kind of Service which She has not render’d her; and the poor Woman,, at this Instant^ is almost my only Comfort, So much was She afflicted at my Wife’s melancholy Death; and I dare anfwer that her Sorrow is as Sincere as mine. The Tears came again into lIefprezs Eyes at this Part of the Story.
As I was going out of - this HouSe, continued he, on Sunday in the Afternoon, I met the Priest who was to marry us the next Morning-y and as he was going to take a W alk, we went together.
Our Steps conducted us intenffbly to the Capuchins Garden, in the Street Saint IAo-nore.^ a Place very distant Srom my Fa-‘ ther’s. We fat^down there upon a Bench, and a Capuchin of the Priest s Acquaintance, came and fat down by us; as 1 did not know them w^dl enough to difeourfe with them
O
upon any Subject but Religion, we handled' that Point very fully.
By the greatest Chance in the' World, my Father happen’d to be then in this Garden, and Seeing me between a PrieSt and a Friar, had
the
S 59 ]
the Ciiriofity to dive into what we were talking about j wherefore he came near us, and listen'd. We were upon Such a Topick that I could not have choSen better; it was upon the Prodigal Son. The Advantage oS a fincere Converfion, and a real Return to God, after a disorderly Life, was treated upon throughly ; and indeed the Air wherewith this Priest and this Friar fpokej in Spired me with Devotion ; inSonluch that although they Said nothing but what I had heard a ThouSand Times, it moved me So Sar as to fetch Tears into my Byes; and as I turn’d about to wipe them, to hide my DiSorder, I perceiv'd my Father just behind me, with only an Arbour between us.
I leave you to judge how great was my Astonishment j it was with Disticulty that I recover’d from the Confuston into which his PreSence had thrown me. He obServ’d it; the Harm'is not very great, Sir, Said he, you might employ your Time much worSe ^ I did not know that you was Such a religious . Man. I return’d him not the least Anfwer, but, making him a very low Bow, went cui: with the Priest who had carried me thither.
On my going Home at Night, I was inform’d that he was in a terrible Passion with me, that he had already ask’d twice or thrice whether I was not come in, and that he would not go to Supper without me. Hereupon, I thought my Self lost, and imagin’d
I 2	that
[ ]
that he had heard fomething of my Marriage, although I did not remember that I had men-tionM it to the Priest whilst in that GardeOy This made me ready to defpair, but I was dcr ceiv'd, 'twas quite the contrary.
I never knew what the Friars had dene to him, especially the Mendicants.^ but he hated them like the Plague. As foon as I was gone out of the Convent, he ask'd the Porter if I came thither Sometimes, who an^ fwerd Yes, as was true, becaufe Qalloiiin^ your Friend and mine, who had turn'd CapU'-chijiy had staid Some Time in that Monastery, whither I went frequently to vifit him. Hereupon, this Anfwer, together with what he had heard me fay to the Two Clergymen, and my , having turn'd away my Footpiaj:) about a Week before, without any Reafon, and refilling to take another that depended upon him, perfuaded him that I had a Defign to turn Friar, and had only diSmifs’d thi^ Fellow, and w?’ent cut always on Foot, to the Fnd that I miofit not be dous’d ; He was in the right in that, at the Bottom, but was mightily mistaken in the Inference he drew from thence.
He had already been railing against the Convent, but 'twas much v/orfe when he faw me. Faith, Sir, Said he, you are preparing me a fine Recompence ! Are you afraid of not hayinu enoiiuh to live upon, or of not being able to get'it, that you have a mind to
'■	bind
SO]
bind yCurfelf with a Vow to be a Beggar,
If I thought, added he, in a violent Fury, that you had a Soul So mean, to throw your fclf into a Convent, I would wring your ' Neck off, adzooks, this Instant, or elfe I would put you where you fliould be as Safely confin'd as there at the least. O the Devil I pur Sued he, miferable Wretches, made up of Dirt and Sordidnefs ,* you fhall be none of them. Faith, whilst I live, I give you my Word of it, Ihl take Care of that.
I was not Sorry to See that his Fears were no better grounded, wherefore I contented mySelf with (wearing to him that I would not diS-poSe of my Sc IS that Way, without his Con-Sent.^ But he still continued his Invectives against the Friars, about which I did not much trouble my Self, having not the least mind to be one. During all Supper-Time, he talk’d of nothing elfe, and lafh a them terribly ; I know not what they have done to provoke his Hatred, but far from bestowing any Charity upon them, he rail’d at them where-ever he met them. Nevertheless he is very charitable; but none but Old Men, Foundlings, and Cripples, who are all incapable of getting their Living, reap the Benefit of his Liberality. This puts me in Mind of a Paf-fage that I Saw, and which I must tell you.
He was standing one E)ay before his Door; giving Orders for the mending a leaden Pipe, which SeryU the Hpiife with Water ; and
whilst
[ 62 ]
whilst he was feeing the Paviors and Plummers Work, there came a Sort of Hermit, and ask’d his Alms. Instead of making him any other An-fwer, hestiow’d him the Workmen; thofe Men there labour, Said he, they earn their Living, they are no Charge to the Publick ; and if, con-tinueid he, the fenfelefs Devotion of Christians did not maintain So many uSelefs Mouths, we fliould not fee fo many idle Vagabonds un France. Do you understand me ? purfued he, looking at him ; upon which the Friar confounded, turn’d his Back upon him.
To return from whence I have digrefs’d ; he ridicul’d the Walleteers (for fo he call’d them) So thoroughly, that all the Servants thought he was perfectly Satisfy’d of my Intentions, that I absolutely defign’d to turn Capuchin^ and that it was becaufe it Should not be known that I had difmifs’d my Footman : This is the Foundation of the Report that was Spread in the Neighbourhood. He Sent then again for this Footman, and order’d him before me, to leave me no more than my Shadow, and to inform hirn of all my Actions ,* and if thou failest me. Said he, look me well in the Face, thou stialt fee a Man that will have thee bang’d : Remember what I promife thee, I am one of my Word, and shall know if thou obligest me.
There was no need of fo many Words, I understood very well that I should be follow’d next M<5rnir!g j wherefore I prevented
[ 6? ]
it, by goiag out before Day, through the Garden ,• and went So many By-ways, before I, directed my Steps towards the Church appointed, that a Man must have been worfe than the Devil, not to have lost Sight of me.
I got thither exactly at the Hour appointed, and they were waiting for me in a little Chapel, which was Shut as Soon as I enter'd therein ; and there not being any one what-foever who was not in the Secret, we were Soon married. The Door was open'd afterwards, and the Priest Said MaSs publickly, after which, my Wife went out first, and the others follow'd.
, I staid behind with the Priest, whom I re-, warded very handfomely; I pray'd him like-wife to come and eat a Bit with us; he came accordingly, and my Wife alSo made him a very handSome Prefent. Before we broke our Fast, he took our Promifes of Marriage, which he had kept five Days, and making us date and fign them; he witnefs^d them, and had them witnefs'd by four Perfons, who were in the Secret, our Landlord, two Merchants that liv'd in the Neighbourhood, and a Field-Officer, all his Friends, for whom he had anfwer'd. He then made us, in their Prefence, take the Oath he had required to; hold it good and valid, after which, he gave me the Promite written by my Wife.
This done, he took me with him; to his Lodging, whither he fent for two Notaries,. ; '.	before
[ «4 ]
liefore whom^ I wrapt up in a Cover that which I had written, and Sealing it with my Seal, acknowledged that what was therein inclofed, was written and Sign’d by me, and contain’d my pure and free Will, in Cafe of Death, or any other Accident j and, that I defired it might be kept fecretj for Reafons that were explaiiVd therein. Hereupon, theSe Notaries imagin’d that it was a Will which I intrusted in the Hands of this Priest,
We then return’d home, where giving this Parcel to my Spoufe 5 here, Madam, Said he, is all that can be done, humanly Speaking, to contribute to your Safety before Men; as to God, fet your Conscience at Rest, your Marriage is good : Keep well this Parcel, and don’t unfeal it ’till it is a proper Time; and when you do break it open, take all the Precautions to which you fliail be advis’d, by Men learned in the Law ; but above all, by fuch as are upright, and your Friends. 1 believe, that after this, ' there was nothing to be faid against its Validity ; and that She might, without any Scruples, look upon me as her Husband : Accordingly stie made none, and I had all the Reafon in. the World to be fatisfy’d with her.
She had come in a Night-Gown, with only a quilted Wastcoat, for which Negligence I thought myfelf obliged to her for, although it was above a Fortnight after DaJIer^ the Weather was not warm enough to go thin death’d : Wherefore, whilst the Priest and 1
had
s
had been gone. She had drefs'd herSel^ info*^ much that at our Return, we found her fet out to the best Advantage, and in |he Posture of a Woman that is defirous of pleafing.
She had put on a Gown of a blue Brocade^ striped with Silver, a Wastcoat of the fame Colour, which, without being imeafy, discover d the Beauty of her Shape ; a white Sattin Under-Petticoat^ with Silver Lace and Fringe ; and a Petticoat of the fame as the Gown, with Silver open Lace, and a tufted Network of the fame } a Pair of blue Morocco Shoes, with a Silver Braid, and Diamond Buckles, and a Pair of black Silk Stockings^ with a Silver Seain and Clocks ,• her Hair finely drefs’d, very fine Linnen, and a rich Pearl Necklace : In Short, She was in a Way to charm any one.
We dinM very well with bur Witnestes; but although the Entertainment was very handSbme and good, I thought it very tedious. The Cloth Was Soon taken away, and the Company v/ithdrew, leaving her and me alone together about Tv/o o’clock.
Here SDefprez again begun his Sighs and Lamentations j thofe happy Moments .are o-ver with me, cry’d he out, I Shall fee her no more, stie is dead, with a thoufand other Things of the fame Nature ^ after which, he went on in a more fedate Tone. I staid then With her till Seven in the Evening, nor were we disturb’d by any one, but to t
Ei	freshmentp
[ <S6 ]
frelhmeiit, when we eat the Remainder of our Dinner with more Appetite, then when it was first brought on Table : We then appointed another Meeting two Days after, becaufe Ihc could not be there Sooner.
I gave her one of the three Keys which ^ I had caiiSed to be made, and left upon the Table, Paper, Pens and Ink to write ,* having agreed that always when we came, which Should be as often as postible on both Sides, we would make frefh Appointments, if we could not meet there at the fame Hour, or if one of us could not wait for the other, and that we would thus inform each other how Affairs went. This done, I fully Satisfy’d our Land-^ lady, who promis’d to take Care of our little Matters, and giving her another Key of the Chamber, left the Houfe the most contented Man in the World.
My only Fear now was the being difeo-ver’^d by my Footman • wherefore in order to put him to a Non-plus, I caufed a Room to be hired in a Houfe adjoining, that belong^ to the fame Head-Landlord, and by his Consent had a Communication open’d between the two Chambers, infomuch that my Wife did not enter by the fame Door as I did. Thus my Servant, who always staid above whilst I was there, was far from feeing her come in, or go out; and when I knew Ihe was in her Room, whereof I was inform’d by a little Bell which She rang, I Sent him
out
C <^7 ]
oiJt of the way for a thoufand Trifles, which he was to fetch from different Places, and would take up Some Time. When She was not there, my Landlady went to fetch me the Letters She had left, and I anfwer’d them in a Minute 5 thus I never went into that X Room when my Footman was prefent, nor when my Wife was not there, and yet I went every Day to that Houfe, on Pretence of new Writings,
I have already told you, that my Wife was ready at Invention, whereof 1 will give you an Instance, We had been together one Day, and ,	had Spent the whole Afternoon with each other,
but was not to meet one anotlier again in three Days, not thinking we Should have any Opportunity Sooner. Contrary to her Expe^Station, Slie had one the next Day, whereof She was obliged to give me Notice that Moment; I was then walking upon the Ramparts with tvvo of my Friends, and She feeing me from her Window, wrote thefe few Words :
I am going to our Chamber^ where I will wait for you.
She came then where we were walking, and taking her Time when we were before her, call’d me aloud by my Name, and upon my turning, and feeing her ; Here^ Sb\ faid flie, with a Sprightly Air, is a Note which is juji fallen out of your Pocket j your Mi-flrejs is 'very much to he pittied., for having fuch a carelefs Dover: This faid. She gave me her Note without stopping.
K 2	They
C ]
They who were with me, knew her very well ^ but as I never vifited her publickly, no Soul living fufpetsted our Correspondence ; wherefore they rallied me upon my .Carelefs^ nefs. I read the Note then, and tore it with So much Indifference, that they were fully perfuaded it affeded me but little: I staid with them afterwards feme Time longer, and at last we parted to go about our Affairs, without my talking first of having any Bu-stnefs. Being rekafed, 1 went to her, and told her that I admired her Prefence of Mind, but that one must ad with Circumfpedion in Attempts of this Nature, and not run the Hazard often.
jt
I faw her one Day at Mafs, and me feem’d to me fick, which put me in Pain ^ I went in the Afternoon to our Chamber, without thinking to find her there, but She was there, and afleep. Our Landlady hearing me, made me a Sign not to make a Noife, and at the fam.e Time gave me to know that stie wanted to fpeak with me, for I was going diredly into the Chamber, becaufe my Footman was not with me.
She told me then, that my Wife had been there about dn Hour, and had faid that fhe had fuch a violent Head-ach, that fhe had not been able to clofe her Eyes all Night ; tha| fhe had thrown herfeif upon the Bed as Soon as fhe came in, ncit thinking that I fhould be there that Day, or at least fo foon, and that ^	^ She
t 4	.
C ]
Ihe had faileh afleep. I beg you, adds this Woman, to let her rest, She has need of it, go and take a Walk, and come again. Hereupon I went out, and when I returned, which was above three Hours after. She was not
V	’	^	*
there, having been gone but a Moment before, but I found upon the Table a Letter which She had left, and which was to this
Effea:.
LETTER.
<
J^id mt think that a Husband ought to ^ hat'o minded his Wife s Slumbers^ efpeci^ ally in a Place where he is very fure that it was not the SDeJire of Sleeping that brought her, I thank you for your SDifcretion ,* hoW’-ever^ doPt apprehend any ill Confequences from my Sicknefs^ I am in good Healthy and very glad to ajfure you thereof; for in all Appearancoy you was afraid that 1 jhould have communicated my SDiftemper to you. 1 have lojl; my Laboury but I flmdd not ' have loft it three Months ago ; the Love you had then for moy was not fo refpeUjuly but it is now grown fo. Depend upon ity howevery that. I will not lofe what I came to feeky and that I will return to Morrow at the fame Houry when 1 expeU that you Jhould difcharge what you owe me for to Dayy and what you zmll then like wife owe me for to Morrow,
I thought
[ 70 ]
I thought this Note very full of Wit, and the Complaint Ihe made me of the Goldnefs of my Love, Seem’d to me very tender and new. WhereSore I wrote her another in the fame Style to rally her, as flie had a mind to put a Jest upon me.
A N S W E R.
I
/
1 ^id not difturlj your Slumbers.^ hecaufe I ** thought you had need of Refl^ and that your lllnefs was not feigned; now you may Jleep at your Eafe., if you pleafe^ for my Heart tells me that 1 fhall he fick when you read thefe Lines, I am ajraid of catching your Diftemper^ and will not expofe you to the Danger of mine; you ha<ve fo often refufedy or recewd^ againfl your Will) what I ow'd yoU) that I am fatisfy d the Payment does not make you at all uneajy ,* wherefore doiit he dijpleafed if I defer it for three Months : My Love will recover) in that Lime) the fame Ardour which it has loji^ during an equal Space of Lime) and will no longer he Jo refpeUfuL
Having clos’d this, I inform’d our Landlady of the Contents both of the Letter, and the Anfwer ; after which, I told her what to do for her Part : The next Day I went thither before her, and hid myfelf when I heard her coming. Our Landlady then acquainted
C 71 ]
qstainted her that I went away angry the Evening before, after having left the Note that was upon the Table. O i my God, cry'd -She, after having read it, is it possible that he Should have fallen into a Passion, about a Jest: only which I would have put upon him. I / Saw the Tears come into her Eyes, and would not give her any more Pain, wherefore I ran to embrace her, and our Peace was foon made.
I ask'd her then, if Ihe was willing that we fhould go and take a Walk together; fhe contented, and it was the only Time that ever . we were abroad in Company together. We were fure that we fhould meet no Acquaintance the Way we went, and were returning back again from our Walk, when the Devil; who intermeddles with every Thing, expoted us to a very extraordinary Adventure.
It was one of the finest Days in the Year, and all the Fields were cover’d with Com ready for the Sickle; a little Rain that had fallen in the Morning, had laid the Dust, and ' render’d the Earth firm : The Sun W’as clouded over, and a gentle Breeze moderated the fultry Heat of the Weather. I have already told you that my Wife was bold and refo-lute in the Execution of what fhe once undertook, as you will fee by the Sequel.
The Height of the Rye, which reach’d up . to our Heads, and even above them, with the Lonelinefs of the Place where we were,
and
C 72 3
0
and the Love I had /or her, kindled in me fuch Defires as I could riot master : Wherefore, I pray’d her to step into the Corn, She made a thoufand Dissficulties about it, but having told her that I absolutely infisted upon it. She went in. This was not the only Time which convinced me that She studied only my Satisfaction, whatever ReluCtance She had otherwise to complying with my DefireSd In effect, it Seem’d as if She had foreSeen what would happen to us: We enter'd the Corn then, thinking we had not been perceiv'd by any one.
I was giving mySelf o\^er to hiy Raptures, when I Sound mySelf Seiz’d on by a Man, whoSe Arriis were long enough to give us Some Trouble, but not to keep us down, although he flew upon us with the utmost Fury 'j whereupon my Wife gave a great Shriek, and diSengaged herSelf Srom my Arms. As the Surprize had not depriv'd me of a PreSence oS Mind, I had Seiz’d in my Turn upon the Man, who began to fear the Effects of his SaucineSs, having met with a Resistance which he did not expeCt. I held him then very fast, draw my Sword, Said I, to my Wife, stab, kill the RaScal, let him be who he will, without Hesitation.
Accordingly She was going to do So without any Ceremony, when this Man, who could not get looSe from my Hands, which held both his Arms, ask’d her Pardon, and begg'd his Life^
At
[73]
At thefe Words, I bid my Wife hold the Point to his Throat, and run him through, if he made the least Offer to rife : She did fo, and I let go his Arms, and got up, and recovering myfelf from my Diforder, took my Sword from my Wife, and bid her go to . our Chamber j and as for thee, thou art dead. Said I to this Man, whom I found to be a Country Clown.
The Wretch being Surprized to the last Degree, did just what I pleas’d ; he lay absolutely at my Discretion ; I kept him upon the Ground, with my Sword to his Breast,
, without his daring to stir, or cry out ; It is certain that he had done either the one or the other, he would have been a dead Man, After a confiderable Time, when I imagin’d that Madame SDefprez might be far enough, neither to fear any Infult or Scandal, I made him get up : Come with me, Said I, and I will pay thee, for the Damage done thy Rye. He thought, as he told me, to have found only : Some Rabble, but our Air stiow'd him he ' was deceiv’d.
He follow’d me then where I pleaSed to lead him, wshich was another Way then that my Wife had taken, and entering into one of the Suburbs, as a Payment for his Rye, I broke my Cane about his Shoulders. After this, two Footmen who knew me, and who happen’d to be there waiting for their Masters, who were in a Garden hard bv, drubb’d him
L ^	like
[ 74 ]
like a Dog Ihut into a Hoiife, and ciired him, as I believe, oS ever having a mind to disturb a Man at Such a Time.
I had Seen, at a Distance, a Woman drefs’d in Black, that was going the fame Way j I Sacrificed her to my Wife’s Safety. I asked thefe Footmen then if they had • not Seen a W'oman in Mourning pafs by ; they anSwer’d yes, but that She was a good Way off, be-caufe stie walkM very fast. They thought it was with her that I had been, which was my Defign 5 wherefore I did not undeceive them, but contented myfelf with defiring them not to fpeak of this Adventure, and paid them for their Trouble.
My Father heard of it that very Night, and* had the Curiofity to ask thefe Footmen if they had Seen the Woman ; they anfwer’d that Ihe was in Mourning, about eight and twenty, and very pretty, but that they did not know her : Thus was all Sufpicion removed, and the more, becaufe they knew my WiSe as well as they did me. He rallied me upon it therefore at Night at Supper, but far from being angry, he only made a Jest of it.
I had rather have you there then in a Convent, faid he, only take Care with whom you meddle. If, added he, the Fair One with whom you was furprized to Day, is but a Woman of the Town, you was in the right to make ufe only of a Cane or a Cudgel;
but
/
C 75 J
but if She was a married Woman, a Widow, or a fingle Woman, whofe Reputation is to be taken Care of, you are in the wrong ; you should have left the .Rogue dead upon the Spot; for she will be a ruin'd Woman, if he should meet with her again, and should chance . to know her.
He Said no more to me, and he was in the right in what he had faid ; but I was very fure he would not have known her again if he should have feen her. After having had him well thrash'd, I went to meet my Wife again^ being vex’d to the last Degree, at having V expoSed her So unfeaSonably, and that sh^ had been Seen by any one but myielf in that Condition, especially by a RaScal of a Country-Clown. I found her, as I expected, in Tears, but, in order to comfort her, I did not fret for Company ; on the contrary, I turn’d it all into a Jest, and telling her in what Coin I had paid the curious Spark, we parted good Friends.
We Spent the whole Spring, the Summer,
' and the Winter, in unconceivable PleaSurcs ,•
I was the happiest of Mankind, and my Wife Seem'd every Day more beautiful, and more amiable to me then ever. Never did two PerSons understand one another better; when we met, we Saluted each other civilly, but with Indifference ; and this was managed So well, that her own Mother was deceived by it, and complain’d that I neglected them en-
L 2	tirely ;
C 76 ]
tirely : Wherefore She defired one of thofe Gentlemen that still ufed her Houfe, to vifit me, and know of me if 1 had any Reafon to complain of her.
This Step was Self-interested, for She still stood in need of my Interpofition, with that Friend whom I before-mentioned tg you. My Wife inform’d me thereof, and we confulted together what Anfwer I Should give, which was, that 1 was always entirely devoted to Mcidemoifelle de U Epine^ and that I would be ready to Serve her in any thing, and any where ,• but that I begg’d to be excuSed from coming to her HouSe, on account of my Father’s absolute Prohibition j and more for her Sake then my ov/n, fince I Should have been there at all Hours, if I had been abfolute Master of my Self.
We met then at the Palais ; I conduded her every where, where she had any need of my Alfistance, and even offer’d her my Purfe, but never Spoke to her Daughter, but to en-. quire after the Society. I had had the Precaution to ask my Father, whether I should offend him, in doing that Gentlewoman Some Services that were in my Power o he answer’d me, that on the contrary, he should be very well pleafed therewith, and that he even defired I would, not having oppofed my frequent Vifits, but on account of the Confe-quences that misht enfue.
It
t.
/
[ 77 ]
It wa-s impoffible to believe that two Per-fonsj who lived publickly, as Ihe and I lived, were Husband and WiSe; and ’twas certainly Something very fingular to pafs by one another, as that often happen’d, and to falute each other as we did the rest of the World, a Qiiarter of an Hour before, or after. Embraces full of the utmost Tendernefs.
She became with Child towards the End of September^ and told me of it, at which I was not forry ,• it was natural: There was nothing more eafy than to conceal it, and that did not prevent our feeing each other. But as ail the Prudence of Man cannot prevent a thoufand Accidents which may happen, I obliged her to take Some Money, which I would have given her a hundred times, and which She had as often refufed. The whole Winter paSs’d on in the fame manner, but her great Belly began to appear fo plainly, that there was no Probability of hiding it any longer.
It was necessfary to think of discovering herfelf to her Mother ^ She had fancy’d that stie could do it with a great deal of Eafe j but when flie was just upon the Point of putting it in Execution, She found a thousand Difficulties therein, which She either had not foreSeen, or which she had hoped that she cou’d have eafily overcome.
She was'afraid that her Mother would not be appeaSed, for her being married without
her
C 78 ]
her Knowledge; efpeciaily to me, becaufe Ihe was apprehenfive of my Father’s Anger and Vengeance ; She was afraid that our Marriage would Seem to her an actual Debauchery. I blam’d her Fears, and endeavour’d to dif-pel them to the utmost of my Power ; but after all. Said I, ’tis a done Thing, whereof I don’t repent: Do you repent of it ? No, anfwered {he ; I donk repent thereof 5 I stiould do it, if was to be done again.
Then I propos'd an Expedient to her, and would to God She had comply’d therewith,-She would still be mine. Well, Said I, don’t return to your Mother’s, stay here, and don’t stir out j no Body whatfoever will come here to look for you, and you may Lye-in in private : Write to your Mather that you have retired to a Convent, let her believe it, or not, you will be never the worfe, what- -ever happens : If She Should not believe it, it will be for her Honour to make others believe it. In the mean while, I Shall fee you cwery Day, and when there is a Time for you to discover yourfelf with Safety, you Shall do it j but do not expofe yourfelf to appear any more before the People that know you especially in the Neighbourhood, where they will Soon difeover the unufual Burlinefs of your Shape.
You are in the right, anfwer’d She, they will fo ; but I can by no means avoid informing my Mother, and 1 beg you to confent to it.
But
C 79 ]
But how will you go about it, reply’d I ? That is what must be thought on. Said She ^ but before I mention it to her, I have a mind
to Speak to--------That is what I absolutely
forbid you, cry’d I, interrupting her, I will not have any one but her know upon what Terms we are together; neither Should She know any Thing of it, if I might rule.
Well then. Said She, embracing me, will you do one Thing for me ? Do you still love me ? I love you better then ever, anSwered I, and ^tis becauSe I love you, that I won’t ex-poSe you to any vexatious Accident.. • As to what you defire of me, assfure yourSelf, that provided I can do it without injuring you, I will conSent to it with all my Heart. What is it ? Tis to Send for her. Said fhe, whilst you are here, and to declare to her, whilst we are both together, how it is with us. You must let her Say whatever her Passion puts in her Mouth ; let her Anger be as violent as it will, you must bear with it: After that, we Shall make her traCiable, by the Dint of ReaSon, and by our Submissions.
I con Sent with ail my Heart, reply’d I, and will even throw myfelf at her Feet, if stis necessary : I will Suffer any thing, provided fhe does not lay Hands upon you, and her Outrages go no farther than Words, for otherwise 1 shall not be pleaSed with them. Wou’d to God, Said she laughing, that I could come off for two or three Boxes on
the
[ 8o ]
the Ear; but you will be by, and it will be in your Power to prevent its coming to that: She will hear Reafon, and feeing that I am not in a Condition to go back from what I have done. She must confent, or at least Ihe must keep it Secret.
Are you absolutely reSoIved upon your Mother’s knowing it, anfwered I i ’tis against my Will, and I am very much afraid that you will repent it; but, in Short, you will have it fo, and that is a Sufficient Reafon for me to confent to it too. Remember, however, purfued I, that you would do much better to continue here, and not return Home any more ,• neither would I have you inform her where you are, but fend her Word you are in a Convent : I very much fear the Con^ Sequence of taking this Step, and if, in my Turn, I were to be ruled by my Forebodings, I fhouid follow my own Advice.
Suppofe yourfelf in my Place, Said She, fire is my Mother, and tho’ She should make others believe that I am in a Convent, with what Suspicions will she not be tortur’d ? "What will she think > In the Name of God, purfued she, embracing me, grant me this Satisfaction. Be it fo, anfwered I, shrugging up my Shoulders, I will oppofc it no longer ,• you need only appoint your own Time, I will be here without fail. We must both be here before she comes. Said she, becauSe we must fend for her. Well, reply’d I, tell me,
when
[ 8i ]
when yoti would have it done.' To-morrow Morning, anSwered llie; my Mother has nd BiifineSs abroad, and will stay at Home ^ wherefore I will fend her a Letter and a Coach, and we will wait for her here.
We met next Morning at the Place ap-^ pointed ; I found her determin’d at all Events^' , and She had already written thefe Lines.
t E T T E R*
j
' Affdlf that has happen'd to me^ 'and that requires your Prefence^ dear Mother^ makes me take Pen in Hatid to heg you to get into the Coach which I fend you^ and come alone where that will carry you,' ^ou will there know what is the matter'
_	jp
which 1 cannot explain to you hut in Per-fon^ and in the Prefence of thofe with whom I now am , from your
A
Most dutiful Daughter and hushble Servant^
Mary-Magbalen De L’Epine*
She Sent this Note with the fame Coach that had brought her, giving Orders to the Coachman to stop at the Houfe if She came alone, and at a Church, if She had Company, with her. I Should have ^one thither for her, but there was no Occafion, for Ihe came alone.-
M	'Wbillt
0
/
[82]
Whilst the Coach was gone for her, we re-folv’d after what, manner fhe Should be received, and it was agreed that I stiould appear before her first, becaiife I did not think it proper to expofe my Wife, in the Condition wherein Ihe then was, to thisTuryof a Woman who has always pafs’d for a Devil, and who in Reality is one, I wrote a Copy of my PromiSe of Marriage, in order to Show it her, without trusting in her Hands either of the Originals; I could eafily do it, without breaking open my Wife’s Parcel, becaufe there was no Alteration, but changing the Names, as I have already told you ; and I transcrib’d it from the Original of her Promise to me.
I had Scarce done writing, when I heard the Coach stop at the Door ; hereupon I made my Wife retire into the other Room^ and lock’d her in. This done, I let the Hangings fall down, and placed Chairs before the Door, which could not be Seen, becaufe it Was a great deal higher then the Floor where we were ; after which, I went to meet Made^^ moifelle de U Epine,
She Was Surpriz’d at Seeing me where She did not expect me ^ walk up. Madam, Said I, giving her my Hand, ’twas I who Sent for . you, your Daughter only lent me her Note. Where is She, Sir, anSwered She ? At MaSs, reply’d I, fhe will be here in a Moment. She walk’d up;ji and^	the Chamber, af-
fer'
•• • .
\ *
[ 83 ]
which, I went down and discharged the Coach, that She might not have a Mind to return very Soon. After this, I went up again, double-lock'd the Door, and took out the Key without her perceiving it: She thought the Furniture very handfome, and ask'd whofe Room it was, but I Soon put an End to thefe Questions, and made her fit down in a Place from whence my Wife might eastly hear every Word that was Spoken.
Can you gueSs, Madam, Said I, fitting down by her, what can have induced your Daughter to Send for you, and not wait your coming > No, Sir, anfwered She : Do you know ^
Yes, Madam, reply’d I, I know very well:
Tlis a Thing stie has done without consulting you upon it, but She has therein only fail’d in the Refpect She owes you, and flie thought that you had So much Value for me, as to grant her her Pardon at my Request. She imagin’d, purSued I, that She might be marry’d without your ConSent, and likewise that I Should prevail on you to conSent: 'Tis a done Thing, all the NoiSe ' that you can possibly make, will fignify nothing ; I am even to inform you,, that stie is entring upon the fifth Month of her Pregnancy, and that ’tis above ten fince She was first my Wife^.
I could hardly make an End, So often die}
She interrupt me. What, Said She, the Slut is marry’d I She is with Child i I’ll strangle
M 2	her ;
[84]
her 3 where is. (lie ? ^Tis you that have de-^ bauched her, I will go and acquaint your Father, that he may fend you to St* Lazarus., and I will put her between Sour Walls. Am not I very unfortunate ? After having brought her up So well, L am ruined, my Caufe is lost, and I am reduced to Beggary. Where is She, that I may strangle her ^ That wicked Slut, that unnatural Wretch, that Jade : In fhorr, stie Said So much, that I can remem-, her no more.
I
. I thought that if I interrupted her. She would only rave the longer ^ for, befides that it would be making her obstinate, it would likewise give her Time to recover Breath; and if I Spoke not a Word, She would be pacify'd of herSelf. I Suffer’d her then to Say what stie would, fhe was in an outragious Fury, and breath’d nothing but Fire and Flames. She looked' in the Bed; behind it, underneath, and every where, where She imagin’d her Daughter might be, but could not perceive that there was another > Room. She then ask’d me again where She waj, that stie might strangle her. ’Tis a contriv’d Thing, Said She ; and indeed I was very glad I had Saved my Wife from her Rage.
She would then have gone out, but as the Door was double-lock’d, and I had the Key; She was obliged to stay. She began again then, and was just going to fly at my Face, and tpr my Fyes out ; however stie
forbore.
[ 85 ]
forbore, notwithstanding her Anger was at the Height: In Short, She held on two Hours without growing a Jot more moderate, and without my opening my Mouth. When I found her a little recover’d, I Spoke in my. Turn j and becauSe with Some Tempers it is proper not to humble one’s Self, becaufe that only renders them more untradable, I began in as haughty a Tone as fhe.
Wherefore, I told her without Ceremony^^ that it was true I w^'as marry’d to her Daughter without asking her ConSent, becaufe I did not value it, neither did I value it then ^ and that I would do the fame Thing if it were to be done again ,* that I did not think I Should have done her any Injury, by allying myfelf to her Family, nor that her Daughter could have been blam’d for giving me her Hand; that I was of Age, as She knew very well herfelf; that if flie was So much Scandaliz’d thereat, fhe might eVen do what flie thought proper ; that flie might, (as She had threaten’d,) go and complain to my Father, who would revenge me Sufficiently of her, and her rough Ufage, without my in termed ling therein ; that I should come off, (as she had Said herfelf,) for being confin’d Some Time at Saint Lazarus^ and should eafily restore myfelf to my Father’s Favour, by abandoning her Daughter; but that for her Part, she would be abfo-Jutely ruin’d in the Opinion of all Perfons
.7*	I#	-	...	,	‘
or
C 8<j ]
pi Honour; for being the Caiife rff hci: Daughter's being no longer look’d upon but as the Whore^ (I Spoke the Word out) of the Man who had marry’d her, and whofe lawful Wife fhe a<stualiy was.
I added, that her Law-Suit, which fiie had So much at Heart, would be gain’d never the Sooner thereby ^ and that my Father, who was a Man of Honour and Integrity, far from thinking himSelf obliged to her for her Shameful and unworthy Sacrifice, would look upon her as a Fury, and a Devil incarnate, who had made her own Blood fall a Victim to fordid Interest 5 that the whole World would abhor her, and that Ihe would have as many Enemies as there would be PerSons of Honour who would hear of her BaSenefs ^ that, on the contrary, if She would do as Honour and Prudence directed. She would fall into none of thefe Inconveniencies; that her Daughter and I had already been married above ten Months, without its being fuf-pected by any one, or ever herfelf, and that we might continue So still j that, as for her great Belly, Ihe needed only to pretend to carry her to a Convent, where her Daughter Should beg her publickly to put her, and that fhe might come and Lye-in at the fame Place where we were then talking j that as to her Law-Suit, I would do her all the Service that lay in my Power, becauSe her Interest would become mine j that fhe would
no
i
C 87 ]
no longer be reduced to die Necessity of borrowing to carry it on, Since my Purfe would always be open to her; and that, in Short, I would do every Thing for her, which could be expected from a good Son-in-Law^’ or a good Son : But, on the contrary, that I would leave no Stone unturn'd to be re-' venged, if She Should attempt any Thing a-gainst my Wife and me; that, as for her Daughter, I Should be able very eafily to Save her from my Father’s Anger, by fending her out of his Way ^ that, ’twas true, I could not avoid giving the Confent that would be required of me, to fet afide our Marriage j ' but, purfued I, pretending to be in a violent Paffion, no Body Shall prevent my giving her enough to live on, independent of you ; and,* to begin, affure yourfelf that you have Seen her for the last Time that ever you Shall fee her ; that before an Hour be past. She Sliall be gone from PanSy and that I won't leave her, ’till I have put her in a Place where She shall have nothing to fear but my, changing ; and not cither your mifchievous Temper, your bad Heart, or my Father’s Anger. Do as you pleafe, continued I, opening the Door, you may be gone when you will, fince you have no more Reafon ; but,' think, however, on what you are going to do, and take Care you don't treafure up for yourfelf a Remorfe that will outlast your
I was
t 88 ] .
i was in the right, in thinking that a llttfe . RoughneSs would bring me off better then all my Submissions. She ask’d me where her Daughter was, but in a manner that madd me find She began to be appeas'd. Your Daughter is just by. Said I, Ihe hears you, and does well not to come in your Way, to be ill uSed ; it is in her Power to come if She pleafes ^ but if She Should offer at it before I call her, I would Show her before you, that I am her Husband, and her Master, and would reward her for expofing her-^ felf unScafonably.
As I pretended in niy Turn, to be’ actually incenfed; She grew entirely calm. But^ Sir, Said She, if M. UI^efprez Should chance to know it, for I am only angry upon his Account, what would he not do ? When I found her tractable, I made her understand how eafy it would be to keep it Secret, and that it having been conceal’d So long, might very well be So yet longer ,* stie partly agreed to it, and ask’d again to fee her Daughter.
I told her there was no Hurry for that, and ^ that I would not let her appear ’till She W^s throughly pacify’d.
Then I gave her to know that the main Point of all was, that our Marriage was good, and could not be Set afide, unlefs I consented, or a fuperiour Power would have it So. I Show’d her ail the Precautions that had been taken, and to convince her there*
ok ■
[8?]
of, propofed to fend for the Priest who had marry'd ys : She begg’d I woii’d.
He did not exped fuch a Summons, and Seem’d a little Surpriz'd on entring the Room^ but Soon recover'd himfelf. As 'tvvas he who had done all, and was bound in Honour - to maintain it, he stiow’d her that all the Care had been taken that was possible ; that the Marriage was good, both in the Main, and in the Forms; in the Main, becaufe ’twas a Sacrament; and in the Forms, becaufe I was of Age, and was not engaged to any one whatsoever: In Short, he laid > fo much, that She Submitted.
She ask’d again to fee her Daughter; 1 thought then that there was nothing more to be fear'd, wherefore I pull'd away the Chairs, open’d the Door of the other Room, took her by the Hand, and led her to her Mother, at whoSe Feet fhe fell. Her Mother raiSed hd up with Tears, niy Wife wept alSo, and excuSed herSelf the best fhe cou’d ; after which, I embraced thein both, very glad that Madenioifelle de II Epine was be^ come tradable at last.
Every thing was thus made up at once •
1 kept my Mother-in-Law and the Priest to dine with us; we had no need of hiding our Selves ; and, in Effed, had it riot been for my Imprudence, nothing would have been discover’d yet. We concluded that my Wife should come the next Day, and continue iri
N	her
t
I
C 90 ]
her Chamber, to go out no more until Sfie Should be brought to Bed j and that that Very Evening, she should defire her Mother, before all the Company, to give her Leave to go,- and be Some Time in a Convent 5-that next Day her Mother should make as if she was going to carry her thither, and should bring her where we then were.
Mademoifelle de Id JEpfne went out first, and my Wife was left alone with me, when-she told me that she was Surprized at the Haughtinefs wherewith I had treated her Mother, but that in the End she had found I was in the right, fince every Thing had Succeeded the better for it. All the AnSwer I gave her, was to kiSs her, and to tell her with an Embrace, I shall be permitted then at lash my dear Child, to Spend Some Nights with you, and have you wholly at my Dif-poSal, She only anfvver’d me with an Embrace likewise, and a Smile, which was more * expressive then all the Words she could have uSed.
I defired her to buy that very Day every Thing that she should want, to the End that she might not be obliged to stir out at all; she anfiver’d she that fire wanted nothing, but that if she should, our Landlady should get it her, without her going abroad. This Woman, who was fond of her to the last Degree, had offer’d her Service to wait ©n her y and as she did not dcbaSe herSelf
therein,,
C pi J
tbei’eih, I took her at her Word, telling her that I should be obliged to her for her Care oS her, which should be rewarded, and that she would Save us from the Neeessity of trusting to a Woman who might betray us. Every Thing being thus refolved on, I went away, and promised to dine there the next Day with her Mother.
They put in Execution what had been concluded on ; I found them both together, we din’d there, and I absolutely commanded ■my Wife not to keep Dent, I lay there that Night for the first Time, and fpent Some other Nights with her there, during the four Months she staid there, but very feldom, for fear of caufing Suspicion, This w^ould have continued ’till the Time of her Delivery, had it not been for the Misfortune that happen’d, which was caufed by my Imprudence, has cost her her Life, is the Caufe of my prefent Affliction, and befides has given the VVorld Such an ill Opinion of me. 1 must tell it you, but give me Time to take ,a little Breath, the melancholy Things which I have to relate, quite overwhelm my Spirits. In £S-fect, he was quite bath'd in Tears, and Seem’d rather dead then alive; he continued Some Time without Speaking, after which, he went on as follows.
1 had been two Days without feeing her ; she was ready to Lye-in, at least she was very much indifpofed j she found herfeif worSe
N 2	then
[ 92 ]
then ordinary, and nor knowing the CauSe which had hinder’d my vifiting her. She Sent me a Letter by our Landlord, which I read, and was preparing to go to her. As I was crossing Our Court-Yard, I met my Father, who made rne step with him into his Clofet: There he fpoke to me of an Employment which he intended to procure me, and like-wiSe let fall Some Words about a Match which he defign’d meJ
Although he only mention’d this as a Thing distant enough, I coird not help being troubled to that Degree, that I knew not what to anfwer. I drevv out my HandkerchieS to hide my Concern, arid without minding what i did, let drop niy Wife’s' Letter which I had just received. I went out then without gathering it up, and hasten’d to fee my Spoufe for the last Time that ever I was to be-Tctd her.
She told me after the first Embraces, that She was not well-look’d after iri the Lodgings where She was, and bcgg’d me to allow her to accept of her Mother’s Offer to Lye-in at her Houfe i that She was very fenfible that She cou’d not go a Week longer; that her Sisters . and Brother knowing that She was marry’d, without knowing to whom, far from being Scandaliz’d thereat, were infinitely defirous of Seeing her, and that the Secret would b# equally Safe, becaufe She Should make uSe of the fame Midwife as her Mother had ufed
for-
[ 93 ]	,	.	.
formerly. MademAiJelle de U Epine was prefent at this DiScourSe, Slie efpouSed her Daughter’s Part, and made an End of per-fuading me.
One has Forebodings of what will happen, but nevertheless one can’t avoid one’s Mif-fortune. A thoufand ReaSons ought to have hinder’d my confenting to this Removal. I told her them, I join’d Entreaties to my Reasons ; I had Said to them a hundred Times, that I would be in my Wife’s Chamber when She Should be brought to Bed, and that I had a Secret Dread of this Removal, which I oppofed as much I could. My SpouSe’s Misfortune and mine would have it, that She made uSe of all the Power She had over me, to prevail upon me. I thought it would be cruel to refuSe a Wife in the Condition mine then was, the Favour fhe ask’d of me with Hands uplifted. Wherefore, although against my Will, I confented ,• that was the Caufe of her Death.
The Time was appointed at Eight next , Morning, to remove her to her Mother’s, vvho, in the mean while, got ready every Thing that Was necestary for her convenient Reception. I did not leave her ’till very late that Night, and was a thoufand Times ready to recall the ConSent I had given her : And as I did not expert to fee her again in a long Time, and after her Delivery, we took a very tender parewel of each other. Alas!
Said
W-	*•
[94]
Said he, with a Flood of Tears, we did not imagine that it was to be eternal, and that we should never fee each other more.
I returned to my Fathers, where I perceived nothing extraordinary, although the Face of every Thing was very much changed there with refped: to me j and not having ^ been fore-vvarnisd. by any one, becaufe no Body knew any Thing of the Matter, I deliver’d myfelf up to the mortal Stroke which he was preparing for me. The very Moment that I left his Clofet, he was going to follow me, and pasting by the Place where I stood to fpeak with him, he perceived a ^ Letter, which he had not Seen at first, be* caufe his Bureau was between him and that.
He gathered it up, without minding what it was, and imagining it was Tne of thofe he had received that Morning, he threw it upon his Bureau, without making any farther Restedion thereon. But obferve the Fatality of Things I This Letter falling upon other Papers, threw them down with it, he took . them up again, and as this fatal Letter happen’d to open the Second Time, he Saw it was a Woman’s writing, other wife he would have treated it with as much Indifference as at first. At the Sight of a Hand that was unknown to him, hs read it, and found it as ^lloW5?
LETTER.
[ 95 ]
LETTER.
V
%	f
\
TJ!AJVEyouahandoitdme.,my dear SponfeT ' ^ ^ What! In the Condition wherein I am^ without Strength^ in a continual Languor., and waiting onIy for the Moment of hring--' ■ ing into the World, hy my Delwery, the precious Pledge which you have intrufted with me, of your AffeUion, and our Union ^ do you pafs two whole Days without feeing me ? Alas ! Lhe moft confirrnd Health that ever 1 enjoyed, has always been impair'd, when I have been only One without ' embracing you ; amd at prefent, when I have need of your Prefejtce, to aid and encourage me in the Pains that are foretold me, you feem to have forgot me. In the Name of God, come to Day, if you would fave the Life of your Wife,
Mary-Ma gdalen D'e L’Epine,
I leave you to imagine to what an Excels of Passion this transported him ; Perfons naturally violent, are more to be dreaded in their Silence, than when they break out inta a Fury : He Said not one W ord, but resolv’d to part us for evet, by fecuriiig me, and driving the Mother and Daughter to all the
^	.	.	, D
Extremities imaginable. He went to the Palais according to Cuftom, and gave Orders
[ 1
ders to an Osticer, with fix Archers, to be next Morning at the Inn of the Flanders Coaches, at the End of St. Martins Street, He did all he could to be authoriz'd in what he defigned, and did it fo Secretly, that not one of his Servants knew any Thing of the Matter, He, din’d in the City, and did not return Home 'till Night, giving Orders when he came in, that I Should be brought to hirri as Soon as I should return Home,
This was not 'till about Eleven ; he fpoke not a Word to me which, cou'd give me the least Suspicion : He only ask’d me if I had any Bufincfs in the .Morning, and faid that he had a Mind to carry me to a Place, whither he ought to have conducted me a long while agb, I thought it was to fee the Father of a young Lady, .whereof he had Spoken to me : With this Thought I told him that I would accompany him where he pleas’d, and that the only Bufinefs I had, was to go to the Palais to the Pleadings. So much the better faid he, we will go together at Six in the Morning, where I intend to carry you ; I Shall not stay long there, nor you neither.
We went then into his Coach exadly at Six, on the iith of Jme^ the longest Day in the Year, an unSortunate Day, which I shall remember as long as I live. He made the Coach stop at the Inn of the Flanders
Coaches, and bid me follow him up into st
Chamber,
C 97 ]
Chamber, As the Lady's Father, tc whoiri I thought he was going to carry me, liv’d in the Country, I imagin'd he had been lately come to Town, and that he lodg’d there, wherefore I went up without any Sufpicion. But^ as Soon as I enter’d this Room, I found my Self Seiz’d by four fwin ging Rafcals, who began by taking away my Sword ,♦ infomuch that I was rather dead than alive. You Ihall, not stay long here. Sir, faid he, you Shall foOn be carry'd elfewhere.
This is the Caufe, added he. Showing me this fatal Letter ; do you know it again ? I would have fallen at his Feet, but he turned his Back upon me, and addressing himfelf to the Olficer, who was there ; don’t let him fpeak to any one, purfued he, and conduct hirn, without Scandal, in Half an Hour where I order’d yon. This done, he went out, and in all Probability hasten’d to St. Lazarus.^ to give Orders for my Reception.
The Officer, who remain’d with me, defi-^ red me to change my Cloaths, and gave me another Suit of mine that was richer, and quite new. 1 ask’d him for What Reafon I, Should drefs myfelf better to go to PriSon ? Tis your Father’s Will, faid he, to the End that it may be believ’d that you are going into the Country. I faw then plainly, that if I did not pull off my Cloaths willingly, they would puli them off for me in Spite of
O	my
[98]
shy Teeth, wherefore I did not oblige them to defire me any more, but pull’d It off. And I have heard fince that they drefs’d therein an Archer, who was of my Shape and Age, and that this RaScal being follow’d by my Footman, and both of them mounted upon my Horfes, had gallop’d through the whole . Street, and that the Rogue^ my Footman, staying behind at an AlehouSe to drink, had told Several PerSons that I was going into the Country, and should not return very Soon. This it was that gave Rife to the Report that I had forfaken my Wife, who, for her Part, vvas ufed much worfe ^ than I.
1 would have protested against the Violence that was done .me, by Reafon of my being of Age ; but the Olficer would not receive my Protests^ I fell at his Feet, and offer’d him my Purfe, wherein were Fifty Louis d' with my Diamond Ring, my Watch, and a Note for what he pleafed, to permit me to write a Word to my Wife, and engage him to deliver it to herf I fwore to him all the ’ Oaths imaginable that I would share my Estate and my Fortune with him, if he would do me that Favour ? and threatned him, on the contrary, with the Severest Re-fentment that should lay in my Power, iS he refufed me ; but he was equally unmovablc by my Prayers, my Prefents, my Offers, and shy Threatnings. I was carried then to St.Ltt^
zavus
[ 9.9 ]
zcirm about Eight o’clock, exadly at the Time that my poor Spoufe^ was breathing her lash
My Father return’d Home when he left St. Lazarus and went from thence on Foot to Mademmfelle de JJ TLpiiws. His V Vifit Surpriz’d her very much, but he Surpriz’d her yet much m.ore, when he told her the ReaSon, and in Such Language, and Such a Rage, that Passion only could excufe : He even uSed her like the worst of Women. In vain did She Swear to him that Siie was innocent of our Marriage ; and that iS flie had her » Daughter at Home, flie would punilli her j He would not hear her Excufes, but uSed her like a Suborner, and my Wife like a lewd Woman and a Prostitute, whom he Swore to have eonfiffd.
He was in the Height of his Passion when my Wife arriv’d at her Mother’s ; ilie had a Master-Key, which hinder’d her knocking at the Door, and the Length of the Entry prevented her hearing the Noife that was made above. She had Sent away the Chair that had brought her, not thinking She Should have any farther Occafion for it, fince flie was at her Mother’s, and Ihe had no Notice that my Father was there, becaufe that at the Noife he made, the Chamber-Maid, the Cook, and the Footman, had run up Stairs.
She went up then without knowing in the least what was doing, and all my Father’s
O 2	Anger
C 100 ]
Anger and Rage gather’d new Strength at her Sight, He ufed Such Language to her as Slie had never been ufed to hear, whereupon ihe fell in a Swoon upon the Stairs, and roll'd down above twenty Steps, Her Mother, in whom fiich a Sight ought to have awaken'd all her Tcndernefs, treated her in the lamentable Condition wherein She lay, with more Hard-heartednefs than the most favage Beast ; and far from giving her any of the Assistance that was necelfary. She refufed to acknowledge her for her Daughter : See, Sir,' faid She, fpeaking to my Father, whether I was the Caufe of their Marriage, This faid, < She fent immediately for another Chair, and in a Swoon, and streaming with Blood, as my .Wife then was, fire had her taken by the Chairmen, who carry’d her in by the Neck and Heels like a dead Beast, and in this Con-(dition Sent her to the Hotel-SDieu> What Cruelty 1 What Barbarity ! Cpu’d any one facrifice her own Blood more inhumanly, to the Fear of lofing an Estate ?
How great Soever my Fathers Anger was. Such a moving Sight appeas'd it j the Hard-heartednefs of this Mpther-in-Law made him relent. He was fo much furprizd,’ that he could nof fpeak ' one fingle Word ; Pity began to take Possfessioii of his Heart ^ he compassionated a Woman, whofe Beauty he had admired, and whofe Destiny he began to lament; He had a Deiign against her Mar-
^	riage,
* \ k	4
L loi ]
fiase. but not against her Life, nor that of her Child. He was even Sorry that he had Suffer’d hiinfelf to be transported to Such an ExceSs, and went out of the HouSe more confounded at what he had Seen, than this unnatural Mother herSeif.
As Soon as he got Home, he Sent her Word that he did not hinder her from rendering her Daughter what Assistance She stood in Need of, in her preSent Condition, and that he even begg’d her to take Care of her, and of the Chiid. She, on the other Hand, who, as She told me, had only been incited to what she did, through a damnable Policy, to preServe herSelf in my Father’s good Graces, was afstitsted to the last Degree, for having carried Things So far , and had only Sent her to the ILotel-Dieu^ in order to shew him the little Concern she had for her ; but with an Intention to go and fetch her back again immediately, and have her carry’d to her Chamber.
She went then to this Hofpstal, where flie found her Daughter; but in what Condition ? Good God I She Saw a Woman as beauteous as an Angel, and handSomely drefs’d, drawing towards her End. She would have carried her Home, but she v/as not in a Condition to admit of being removed : Ail that could be done, was to carry her into a little private Room ; for my poor W ife was then dying. She was fetch’d out of her firSt Swocn by
the
\
[ 102 ]
the Motion of the Chair wherein they had carried her ; and She fell into another a Minute after, without having had the Strength to utter one Word.
When She came out of her Second Swoon, She found herfelf upon a Sorry Bed, in a Place, ( what Shall I call it c*) in the Company, aind rank’d in the Number, of fifty Thoufand common Whores, the wretched Refufe of the Debauchery and Stews of ^aris. What Horror! Scarcely had She open’d her dying Eyes, when they mov’d her into the Chamber before-mention'd, in Presence of her Mother ; they try’d to comfort her, but the Stroke was too Severe not to be mortal.
She remain’d about an Hour without Showing any Signs of Life, but by distradted Looks, which She cast on every Side at a Venture ,• at last She open’d her Mouth. Her first Care was to inquire for me ,• and they told her I was not there ; whereupon She call’d for Pen, Ink, and Paper. They would have prevented her writing, becauSe She was not in a Condition for it, without doing herfelf farther Harm : But She redoubled her Intreaties So earnestly, that at last they brought them. She wrote then ’till She was Seiz’d with Convulfions, and ’twas this very Paper which you Saw, and which I wear upon my Heart : Read it ^ I took it from him, and with great Difficulty read as follows.
LETTER,
[ 103 ]
LETTER.
1AM dyings 1 did not expeU fo many
Misfortunes at once: 1 dont enquire after the Author's of my Deaths hecaufe I refohe to forgwe all the World, Farewell my dear. Hush and., you will ha^ve nothing left of me hut the Eememhrance, 1 feel your Child., it is dead ,* 1 am dying likewife ,• if I could embrace you before my--
I could read no more, the rest being nei-, ther legible, nor coherent: He took the Letter Srom me, kifs'd it, and placed it again upon his Heart; and with much Difficulty, (fo much was he interrupted by his Tears and Sobs,) aSter which he continued his melan-dioly Story.
The Convulfions feiz’d her, as I was telling you, and prevented her ending her Letter; She came again a little to herSelfi and defired Abfoludon, which was given her ; aSter which, Ihe was delivered of a dead Child, and in a Qiiarter of an Hour expired in the midst of her Pains, and weltring in her Blood, without uttering a Syllable against any one whatever.
Such, purfued he, all bath’d in Tears, Such was the End of my dear Wife, and of our Love, which Lofs I Shall eternally mourn. This Part renew'd all his Griefs, and even render’d them more violent, and although
Heaven
c 104 i
^	' i
Heaven has not given me d Soul Very fuf-ceptible of others Misfortunes, I could not help weeping with him. I was indeed moved with this Relation, and his Adions ; and I perceive you are So too, faid LIupuis^ to all the Company, who indeed had Tears in their Eyes. Make an End of your Story, I beg you. Sir, faid Madame de Contamine^ and we will tell you afterwards our Thoughts of this melancholy Adventure.
SDupuis went on as follows: As for me, continued	after having recover’d him-
felf a little, I was, as I have told you, at St. La^ zarus.^ wherefore I cou’d not be inform’d of this Death, which happen’d much about tho fame Time that I went thither. I remain’d there a Week with incomprehenfible Impatience ; during which, there came to me every now and then feme of thofe good Mistlona-ries to keep me Company ; they endeavour’d to comfort me, and by little and little, made me apprehend yet fome greater Misfortune than my Confinement: At last, they inform’d me of my Wife’s Death. Then it was that I lamented the Lofs of my Liberty, becaufe I, could not revenge my Self, nor yet dye according to the Dictates of my Defpair. I did, and faid a thoufand Extravagancies ; in vain did they strive to comfort me for three Months: They faid that I was delirious, and the Caufe of my Grief was too just to fet any Bounds to it.
;	■	' Thefe
[ 105 3
* ■ < TheSe good Men Sympathiz’d with it; they
afflidted themSelves with me, to render me tradable : IS they have not Succeeded, at least they have appeaSed thoSe violent Transports that inspired me with nothing but the Thoughts of committing Murder. I did not leave them, ’till they Saw me comppSed enough not to fear any deSperate Deed from me j but far from returning to Parts^ I have been iti Normandyy at a Seat of my Brother-in-Law, M* de QuermlleSy from whence I , have been return’d but a Week.
As Soon as I arriv’d here, I went to, the IIotel-SDleUy where I have mourn’d the LoSs of my poor Wife ; 1 ask’d for the Place where her Body lay ; She and her Child being buried there together, and Swooned a^ way upon it: I can go thither no more. I heard that her Mother had taken away a Letter that fhe wrote. I went to her, flie gave it me, 'tis that which you have read.
I live now only with Defign to be revenged of this Mother-in-Law ; whom I intend to croSs to the utmost of my Power / notwithstanding the Submistions Ihe has made to me, the Pardons She has ask’d me, and the Sorrow fhe exprestes for the Death of her Daugh -ter: To be reveng’d iikewiSe of the Rogue of an Officer, who arrested me, and So cru-ctly refufed me the melancholy ConSolation which I begg’d, of writing a Word to my poor Wife, and carrying it to her t As for
P	the
4
>
[ ]
the Rogue my Footman, although the least to blame, I am already revenged of him ; and when I have Satisfy’d my Refentment, I Shall lee how Fate will difpofe of the Rest of my Life.
Now fee, after the LoSs I have fustain'd, if I am not more to be pittyM then blamed ;	;
and whether ’tis true, as ’tis reported, that I forSook poor Magdalen.^ and am the Caufe of her Death ? I, who would purchafe her Life at the Expence of mine, and a hundred thoLifand others, if I had them to give for her.
This, Ladies, purfued Dupuis^ is the Way that Defprez told me his Story; and Fm not Judge of the Looks of Men, if his Grief was not very Sincere. He has not declared his Marriage for Several Reafons; the chief whereof are, that the Place where She died, would be no Honour to him : 'Tis true, he was not the Caufe thereof ^ but to justify himfelf, he must have declared all, and thereby it would have been known that his Father was partly the Caufe, by his violent Passion, which is not known by any one, none but the People of the Houfe having been Wit-nefies thereof. Belides, the Deceafed would not have reapM any Benefit from this Honour^ but only her Mother, whole Ruin he had fworn. He still moves my Compastion ; I don’t believe it is poflible to be more deeply ,astli(sted.
He
[ 107 J
He vow’d to me, that he would preferve an eternal Fidelity to the Memory of his SpouSe ; and he has done it : For, whatever Methods his Father took during his Life, he cou’d never oblige him to marry i and at preSent that he is his own Master, and polSef-fed of one oS the best Posts in the Law, the Manner of his Living proves fushciently that he has broke off all Correspondence with the Fair Sex ; and that his Thoughts are wholly bent upon Vengeance.
The Officer has found it to his Cost ,• he has been obliged ‘to iezve Fraitce ; Defprez had stuck So cloSe t6 his Skirts, and examin’d So narrowly into his Life, that he found enough to have had him broken upon the Wheel j and nothing but his Flight has Saved him from Justice, and from the Refentment who is still in PurSuit of him.
M, SDefprez.y his Father; had conceived. Such an Averfion against Mademoifelk de JO Epine^ that he could never bear the Sight of her, after her Barbarity ; and his Son has follicited him So powerfully, that he has given up the Judgment of her LaW-Suit of his own Accord, and it is not yet ended, becauSe JDefprez has employed all his Interest to make her loSe it.
«
FINIS.
1 k
NEW
PAMPHLETS
Lately Fuhliflfd
England’s Genius: Or Wit Triumphant.
Being a Coljedtion of Several Hundred Liegant, Satyrical Jests, and WitticiSms, Sharp B.epartees, Brstliant Thoughts, Merry Poems, and xVdmirable Sayings, of the most celebrated Wits and.Punsters of the preSent Age, Taken from the politeSf Conversations, as Drawing-^EoowAi JffeiMieSy Palls^ and the ^ar. AlSo from the Bedford-Head^ Key and Qarter^ and Ritmp-Stake Clubs : And the other genteel Reforts of xLQ IBeatt- Monde, Never before published. Price i s.
The FiniJIIdRake: Or, Gallantry in Per-feU ion. Being the Genuine and Entertaining Adventures of a young Gentleman of Fortune, faithfully extracted from Memoirs written with his own Hand, and defign’d by him to be publish’d,. as is believ’d, had he not been prevented by Death. The Whole being interSpers’d with Several curious, whimfical, and uncommon
NEW PAMPHLETS.
mon Incidents ; particularly his Intrigue with a fine Cociuette Milliner, near one of the most noted Inns of Court, whilst he was a Student.
Womett^ horn to he controuTd^
Stoop to the forward and the hold j ^ut yet you know they feldom fail^
Io make the Jioutefi Men turn Tail^
And bravely [corn to turn their ^acks Upon the defperafji Attacks, Hud. Pr. is.
If he Merry-thought: Or, Ihe Glafs-Window and ^og-Houfe Mifcellany : Taken from the Original Manufcripts written in T>iamond by Perfons of the First Rank and Figure in Great Britain; relating to Love, Matrimony, Drunkennefs, Sobriety, Ranting, Scandal, Polities, Gaming, and many other SubjeiSts Serious and Comical • faithfully transcribed from the Drinking - Glastes and Windows in the Several noted Taverns, Inns, and other publick Places in this Nation: A-mongst which are inferred, many curious Pieces
from both Univerfities.
*
Gameyorum^ Wildum^Gorum^ Gameyorum a Gamey^
Elumanm a Rumarum^
A Rigdum Roll arum A Rigdum^ for a little Gamey.
Bedlam-Wall, Moorfields.
In Four Parts. The Third Edition. Price of each Part 6 d.
The
NEW PAMPHLETS.
L The BE A U’s MISCELLANY :
Being a curious Collection of amorous Tales, diverting Songs, and entertaining Poems; par-ticularlywthe Curious Maid, two Parts: The Peeper; the Leaky Vessfel j the Bauble ; the Longitude; the ParSon and his Maid; the Hoop Petticoat; the Tickler, or the Favourite ; the Maiden s Dream ; the Batchelor’s Dream ,• mm multis alijs.
Sum bona^ funt quadam Mediocria funt mala plura^ Quae legis ; hie aliter non Jit, Avite Liber. Marc.
If thefe merry SLales don t every Humour hit.
Let Fops like me ne*er nibble more at IVit.
JVit like Beauty triumphs Per the Heart,
IVhen more of Nature s feen, and lefs of Art. Prior.
In Two Parts. The Second Edition. Price of each Bart L s. or Bound together, z s. 6 d.
A View of the TOWN, or Memoirs of LONDON'; containing a diverting Account of the Humours, Follies, Vices, &c. of that famous Metropolis; wherein every Offer' ce meets with its due Correction, Fools are fcoiirg’d. Knaves jirk’d, and the Ladies have a Stroke by the Bye : In fine, not to pall your Appetite by a tedious Repetition of Particulars, here is in fliort as much Sing Song as in the beggars Opera ; and more new Whims than in the Orator s Advertifement?.
My IIook a Salefman s Shop you II Jind^ Where cwilly rU treat ye;
Lo a TooVs Coat of any ILind Lou re welcome, if it fit ye.
The Second Edition. Price i s.