Call/MSS #: Bib ID:
Collection
(Teerink pr3291.n325.n4 171
:^V.S^^V.^^^^V.•AS^•.•.^•A^^S^S^^^^V.V.•A^^^V.VA•AV..AVA^•AVAV.^V^V//.•AWW.».VAVAV.•AWA^VAV.V.VWAVkVAWA^VAWA^^^^S^I
^VW.W.^V.•AV.^VAV^.^V/AVAV^.^^•AW^/.^WAWAVA•AW//A•^.-WWA^W^W/W^WW.^^V^A.W/A•AW^A•AWWAV.^^>
6134731




VA•.•AVAVA•.V.WA•AV»VS^•.•AVAV.•A^,SWA•.V.VAVA^VSV.VA•.V.•AVA^•.V.•ASV.>VWA•ASV.^AW.•AVAVVV<.•A^•,<
Total # Images # Foldouts: Pages To Dig:
.1
I	=:
V. . .-.PAV.-A <, . .•.V-*W.-.-.*AV.V.r/.-AV. AV.-,W.V.WA-,-.-.-.*AV.-AV.*AVAVAV.V<*AV.V.VVA ^A*ASV.V.*.-AV.*.V^^. <A-,-,VA .'.VAWAV.VAVVV/.^ ^.•.•.•.V.-.V.-.*.-.-AV.-A*.V.W.*.V.-.^A-.-.-.AVAr.V.VA-.-.VAViA*.VAWA-.W.-W.-.WA%V.'A-AVWLVAV.VAWAW.-AVA-.WAV.-.V.VA-.-.*.W.V,V,v^
I	I
•.•.W.SW.-.-.V.V.-.%V.W.V.V,V.V.W.WAV.*.^WAV.SV.W.VA*.V.V.*.VAV.V.W.'.-AWAV.V.W.W.%V.-.V.*.*.«.V.%V.SV.*.V.V.V.VA'.*.VA%W.*.WA\<
^.VA-.‘.'.V.VAW.‘.V.V.V.V.VA*.V.‘.VAV.*.«ASV.-.WAV.VAV.VAW.*ASVAV.*.VAV.V.VAVAW.VAV.V.V.V.VA%W.VW.W.V.%VAW.VW.SV.V
I	I
1	1
?	%
*,	.*
.•.VA-ASWA-.SSSWA%VA‘.VAVANW.NVA'AV.W.V.%'A-AV.-.V.V.-AW.V.-.-.W/.'AV.VAWAV.V.V.*AVAV.*AVA*.W.V.‘A*.-.-.V.VAVA*A'.W.?
Condition Notes:
^.•.V.*.*.*.VA*.SV.‘.V.*.V.SV.%V.V.*.V.‘.VAV.VAV.V.V.‘.*.V.V.*.V.V.‘.V.*.V.*.V.SVA'.V.*.*A*.*AVAV.*.V.*A*.*A*.VA'AV.».*.VAW.V.V.*.VA*.*.V.*.».*^,^AV.V.W.V,V/A'.V.W.*,WASW.M.*.VAV.V.*.
1 volume
''W/A*A»/AV.VJV.*AVAW.VA*AW.^A»A*A«AVAAV.VWAW.*AW{
.W.-.V.-.*.SSVApS%V.‘»V.S-.".S*.-A-A>VA%SS\-.>SAS-,-.SWAVAV.V«.V.S".V.-.>1,NSV.-ASSV.».S'A-.S*.-.VAWASWAVAV.WA%>-.%-.
Notes/lnstructions:

rV.*AV»*.V»VA%VWAAVAWAWV‘»WVVV
iW^

Image name convention:
pr3291_n325_n4_1713_body0001.tif
^VA^^Vg»A•A•.•A■A•.•AVI.•.•A^W.•.^«A^VA•W.•.«.■.VA*.^••.<^^•A•A•.•.PAl^AWA^VWXMA•A•A^^
.*A‘.S'.V/«V.'.

ALA
A
fmmmmk
\
NEW VOYAGE
T O T H E
ISLAND of FOOLS,
/
Reprefenting the
Po LI c y, Go VER.NMENT,
AND
PRESENT STATE
O F T H E
STULTITIANS.
By aNoSLE Venetian.
If/fcriild to the Kight Honourab
The Lord FERDINANHO.

Tranflated from the Italian.
« Mukaque	Terris allabimur illis^,
Quas procul hinc cernis *, procul hinc tibi (cerne)
videnda eft „
“ INSULA, vifa mihi.	Ovid. Met. 1.14.'
:l 0 N D O M
Prioced fot John Morphew near Sta,ttoneds-Halt, iPd.
I
I
JL
V
. \
' J
TO THE
I';:


■ V:

•V^Hr
*	v-^
V'i

V
‘•y„.
£
•V


LH
>
>
-#r*
V-iCi
■'•i
.’Q
Hough this ISL AN D off OOLS is not
to be met with in the Map of the Worlds yet you may guefs at the Right Name of it, as well as its Situation, by the MANNERS of the Inhabitants. The People are not
STULTITIANS hy Nature, ha Praaice. Whin
t	>	^r.	^
their Pblipy and Government is rightly managd, they deferve the heft CHARACTER in Europe, and are the Happieft People under the Sun 3 ving that they are never wholly free from Corruptions both in C H U RC H S T A T E.
The VOYAGE was as Pleafant and Safe to
US of we could wijh ^ and the PLACE, fo much
famAfor VICISSITUDES<?/Fortune and
Foolery, every way anjwerd our Expestations, upon Landing, We found the COUNTRY
hugely well fiockt, as other Places are, with Good
* «
I 4
and
. « / *

To the READER.
and Bad of AH fortt of People. But fome novel
Diftinstions^ <?/High-Churcb, Low-Church, No Church, New Whig, Old Whig and Crafty!
breed fuch DIVISIONS among em 5 that they render the ISLAND a little linfafe, or at lead Unfortunate 5 for it is never more in DANGER than it is of IX SELF;/ mean.^ of Inteftine Broiles, and C O N T R A S T 0*s	its own
Bowels.
So far our AUTHOR* And now the Tran-Oator hopes.^ that fitch ingenious Observations upon the Policy, Government and Prefent State of the STULTITIANS, as are fet forth in This NEW VOYAGE here, wiU be as highly diverting to the Reader in E N G LIS H, as they have appeald in ITALIAN; and that the BO OK will fare no PVorfe Publick for being of a Foreign ExtraQ:, or Fanciful Original, un* der the Feign’d Cover of the ISLAND of
FOOLS*
* /
V'
pfmn
/
A
CO


A
NEW VOYAGE
TO THE

ISLAND of FOOLS,
B Y A
NOBLE FENETIAN.
HEX ask you are pleas’d to impofe upon me might be perform’d with left Difficulty
SIR,
I if I were not So much a Stranger to the A^a-
ture. Language.^ and Cujioms of the People you command me to defcribe. However, that you may fee how ready I am to obey you, I have ventur’d to draw up an Abjlra^ of all that I think either worth your Notice or my Obfervation.
We landed in the ISLAND OF FOOLS the
23d of September laft, at a frnall, but commodious Bar-hour in the JKejiern Part of the Country, from whence we fet forward the next Morning in order to make the befl: of our way to the Metropolis,
My Companion, who was a Boglander, and fpoke the Language tolerably well, did all he could to divert me upon the Road; and indeed by vertue of a good Affiirance and fbme other vfeful Salifications which the Gentlemen of his Country are naturally gifted with, we
B	pafs’d
2
A New Voyage to
pafs’d over the firft Day with as much Satisfastion a® could be expected.
The two following days nothing of moment happen’d, only our Landlord where we lodg'd entertain'd us with the different Sentiments of the Gentlemen of the Neighbourhood^ from whence we could draw no other Inferences but that there were a world of Fa-Bions and Divijtons between two Parties that were furioully contending for the Superiority.
About Seven the third Night we came to the chief City in the Wejlern part of the IJland, where we were inform’d we might be accommodated with a Coach to the end of our Journey. The Place., tho’ none of the fineft I have feen, was extreamly well fituated, in a wholfbme Air, and in a very beautiful Country, about three Miles diftant from the Sea, from whence, fome Years before, they had cut fb good a Pallage that a Ship of threescore or fourfcore Tun may be brought with fafety into the very Heart of the Town.
We were oblig’d to continue here three or four Days before we could get Places, in which time we had leifure to view the Cathedral, and to inform our lelves in every thing that the Place afforded. My Companion, who had liv’^d in Spain and Portugal., had fbon conttadled an Acquaintance with feveral of the .Merchants. who trade to thole Countreys: One of ’em in* vited us to dine with him-, after Dinner, over a Bottle of very good Port JVine, entertain’d us with the following Relation.
Sir., fays he, addrefling himfelf to me, / perceive you are an abfolute Stranger to this IJland, and perhaps for want of a right Information of the Nature, Policy, and Coyernment of the Stultitians, and from our outward appearances., may take us for a People very different from whctt we have been reprejented in other Countries.
For my own part I JJtant pretend to give you either our
Hiftory &r Character, when you come to the Metropolis,
whither
the Ifland of Fools.
$
foon find
—	---- J --	^ j--
World has not mifiaken us^ and that of Jb many ridiculous and unaccountable .ABions that no Nation under Heaven can equcfl our Folly^ and that we are in reality an Jfland of Fools.
Here my Com^amon broke in : Sir.^ fays he, I have been in mojl Countries, and feen mofi Q)urts of Europe, where I have often heard the Ifland of Fools com^ mended to the Skies for the Bravery of the Inhabitants^ the goodnejs of the Soil^ the pleafantnefs of the Climate^ and above all, for its happy Situation with refpeB to Trade and Commerce.
JJl this is true, replies the Merchant, Providence has been extreamly kind to us, and we have all the Advantages you mention, with a great many more to the highefi per~ feBion; but what do they all fignifie, unlefs we could be perfwaded to make a proper ufe of'em.
Sir, I have as much refpeB for my Native Country as any Man that was ever born in it, but notwithflanding that, J cannot fo far contradiB my own Reafon and Experience to afiirm that we are a People any ways confiderable either inWifdom, Loyalty, or Moral Virtues, which I take to be the dijtinguijlnng CharaBer of a Wife Nation, and the true Fundamentals of good Government.
If your Companion would have given me leave! would have troubled you with a flmt Detail of the prefent fate of the Stultitians ^ which after having drank the Princes Health and Profperity to the Ifle he began to this effedl.
Of all the Nations in the World there is none that I know of fo eafily furpriz’d into an Opinion of any thing, and fo intirely govern’d by Humour and Paf-fion as the Stultitians. There’s no more to do to prepare them for Mutiny, Rebellion, or any general Undertaking, but to rome the People’s Fancies with Ibme new Notions or ProjeBs which they greedily run away with without confldering whither there be ei-
B 2	ther
4
New
ther Truth, Reafon or Probability in *em; like Hogs, put them out of their way and they run dire£Uy forward till they come to a ftand, and fb perhaps they may ftop to take a little Breath, and then commonly they turn about and run back again with greater Fury than they came on.
What good ^alificatiom they may have to bal-lance this fbolifh one, I own I am not mafter of. If it was worth your leifiire I could produce a thou-land Inffances of fuch hairbrain d ridiculous A£l:ions, that would fufficiently convince you, that never any Nation, that Nature and Providence have been fo exceedingly kind to, have made fo little ufe of < their Advantages ^ but. Sir, ’tis not my Intention to detain you with Particulars, when you come to that great Town whither you are bound, your own Experience, with the Accounts you will there be furniln d with, will foon fiipply you much better than I can pretend.
In general, this I take to be the genuine Temper and almoft univerfal Practice of the People of this Ifle. They will Pray^ Faivn, Lye., Flatter^ Swear,, For-faear, .Murder,, Rebel, Cheat, Betray one another, and perpetrate any manner of Villany to gratifie their different Sentiments, Inclinations, and Intereft, Powerful Intereft ! has got the alcendant and governs every body but a few Fools and Rakes.
'Tis for Intereft the Soldier wades through Seas of Blood without confidering the Juftice or Injuftice of the Caufe be is engag’d in«i For this the ?riejls Preach and Pray, Trim, Cant, Swear, and often for-fwear themfelves. For this the Lawyersd.^e2\ in Perjuries and Forgeries. For this Men turn Fools and RafcaU, and fink themfelves below the Dignity of their Nature, and the CharaCter of Rational Creatures.
In this IJle Virtue has almoft intirely loft its Prero-gative, and grovy Great chiefly by their Vices,
U
/

the Ifland of Fools.
ow Learned, Wife or 1
5
or how Guilty or Innocent, but how much or how little you are worth. The fmalleft Faults of a Poor Man are Villanies, and he is often utterly ruin’d for meer Trifles, whilft the Wealthy Knave carries off his Exorbitant Cheats and Extortions without. Enquiry, and has a fet of Mercenary Flatterers always ready to defend his Chara&er and to adore his Grandure.
Among all out great Men and high Fretenderst]xQtQs not one in fifty, I fpeak it by Experience and with great regret, my Lord.^ that has either Honour, Ho-nefty. Common Jultice or Generofity. The Hiltories of the Noblemen of Ancient Times give us an Account, that they were	Brave, Juft, Good and
Hofpitable, but the truth of this will not ftand the Teft in our Times.
Our great Men are all degenerated and become Slaves either to their Avarice, Ambition, Revenge, or what’s worfe, to their Follies and Vices. Some of them are profefs’d Rakes, and fquander away their Strength and their Subftance in the purfuit of Riots, Whoredom, and all manner of Wickednefs and Folly. Others are no left fcandalous for their Griping and Penury, and for their Knavilh Arts and Stratagems to fill their Coffers and promote, their own private Intereft.
Some there are, I wilh, my Lord-, you may never have any occafion to be acquainted with them, that ufe all Mankind as their Tools and Properties, feed them with flattering Hopes and deceitful Smiles, only to croud their Levees and aggrandize themfelves. .Merit they let ftarve, and imploy few but Sencelejs Coxcombs and Mercenary Sycophants -, or if by chance they are oblidg’d to make ufe of a Man of merit, they fuffer him to fubfift upon meer Shams and empty Promifes till he has done their Bufinefs, and then they throw him afide among tho Lumber, like the Scaffolding
It
6	A New Voyage to
folding after the Houfe is finilh’d. If after long At-tendance and much Drudgery and Fatigue he does get any thing from them, they bring him under liich Limitations, and lay So many Reftraints upon him, that
never make him any tolerable Recompence for thelofsof fo much precious Time which he mighthave imploy’d to far better and more advantageous purpo-fes than in the Service of fuch ungrateful Patrons.
If from thefe great Ones we call our Eyes upon the generality of the Inhabitants, and view ’em altogether, what a ftrange Medly and Confufion do they make: In one place you’ll fee a Golletfion of dull Phlegmatick Wretches lolling at a Table, poring over a heap of News-papers, and making ridiculous Remarks and Observations upon every Paragraph, and palling their Sencelefs Opinions, and didating as confidently and majeftically as if they had a Correspondence with moft of the Cabinets in Europe, In another you’ll meet a gay Fop rattling about in his painted Chariot, more proud of his new Liveries and Equipage than his Underltanding, which in many re-fpeds he is as unfurnilh’d with as the pamper’d Beafts he is drawn by.
Here you may See a SempJIrefs that has Jilted fbme young Heir out of his Money and his Reputation, drefs’d like the Daughter of a Nobleman. An Oafl-ler^s Son in a Scarlet Coat, with his Sword by his fide and a lac’d Hat, looking as big and furious as a Captain of the Guards, whilft Gentlemen of Birth and Quality are cloath’d in Rags and out at Heels, and made even the Jeft of the Rabble.
Here rides an ignorant Emperic in Velvet with his Gold-Chain about his Neck, and there trudges a Man pf Learning and hardly Shooes to his Feet, up to his Knees in Dirt. All Hats fly off to the Fool in Ofice while the Man of Sence, that’s poor and out of Im-ploy, is juftled by Porters and Footmen, and infult-j“d by every one he meets.	Here
(
the Ifland of Fools.
y fee Gamefters and ( Perfom of polity of both
\
7
refs*d by ’em to a very high degree ♦, a fort of fcanda-lous Pradice, I think, that was never heard of in any other Country but among the Stnltit'ians.^ and is no very good Indication either of their Wifdom or Condud.
Sir, it would be endlefs to detain you with the many unaccountable Follies that every Day produces in this Ifland, and I Ihould utterly tire your Patience, as I am afraid I have done already, to give you their particular Recital ^ I will therefore only take the liberty to trouble you with a few general Inftances and leave the reft to your own Observation.
Here I could not forbear asking hi‘m a ^ejiion ^ Sir, you were faying your Gamejlers and Common Sharpers were permitted to play with your Per fins of ^tality., fuch a thing I confefs may be by accident, and I have now and then Seen in other Countries, an Impudent Fellow with a fine Coat and a gaudy Equipage that has got admittance, but he is no Sooner difcover’d but fbme of the Company informs the Matter of the Houfe who he is, who looks upon it as a great Affront, and as an Act of the higheft Infolence, and aftd having excus’d himfelf, orders his Servants to turn him out of Doors with the utmoft marks of Contempt and Re-fentment: Pray therefore give me leave to ask you; Do tliefe fort of Sparks Game and Converfe with your Ladies and Perfins of ^ality publickly and without diftinction ; and are never they Severely reprimanded and kick'd for their Impudence > I will not flifpect the truth of any thing you are pleas’d to relate, but to me this Seems fiich a monftrous piece of Folly, and reflects Ib much upon the Honour and Conduct of the Stultitians^ that 1 profefs, Sir, the Account furpriles
me.
fivers theMer-
ite-Houfes near
the
N
8	A New Voyage to
the Court, to fee what Swarms of thefe Vermin are intermix’d with Dukes^ Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, nay, even with the Senators and chief Mmijlers of State, and to hear how they Swear, Blafpheme and Domineer, and with what intolerable Sawcinefs and Impertinency they behave themfelves.
Sharping and Cheating is become a Handing Trade a-mong the Stultitians, and many of the Cunning .Men and able Workmen, as they call themfelves, have paft through their whole Lives in the higheft Splendor and Luxury, that had no manner of Foundation or Depen-dance but purely Cheating and Sharping.
I confeis thefe things hardly merit belief 5 a wife Man can fcarce imagine there Should be fuch a Fool in Nature as a Perfbn of (Quality that puts himfelf upon the level with one that he knows makes Gaming his Livelihood, as he muft do if he condefcends to play with him for Money; and yet, Sir, this is matter of faft, and every Day produces a thoufand Inftan-ces of it.
But, Sir, the frequent pra£lice of thefe things has intirely worn out their Obfervation. Here an ignorant Scoundrel that was originally but a Green Keeper s Boy games with a Lcrd-Treafurer, a Chimney-Sweeper with a .Marquifs or an Earl, a Black-Guard Boy with a Dutchefs ^ Barbers, Pedlars, Tinkers, Taylors, Oaji-lers, &c. with Generals and Colonels of the Army, and the Fidler^s Son throws at the faireft, fometimes at all the Lords 5 and this is done every Day, without a-ny manner of Diftindion, at the Groom-Porter s and at moll of the Publick .Meetings both in Town and Country.
This foolifh Ifle is a common Recepticle for the Sharpers and Cheats of all foreign Nations when they are grown Notorious at Home their next Refuge is the IJland of Fools., where they are fecure to find thofe among the Stultitians that will readily joyn with ’em
in
th Ifland of Fools.
9
in tli^ management of their Cheats and neW-invent-ed Games, which at this time, notwithftanding the Law that was lately made to prevent ’em, are grown more numerous and barefac’d than ever.
Sure, Sir, there cannot be a greater Indication of a fencelels ill govern’d Country, than to fiilFer fuch vaft Numbers of theft ufeleft idle Creatures to live in common among the People, and to form thein-ftlves into ftlefl Sets and Societies for their better eonveniency of Sharping and Cheating.
About three Months paft I was at the principal City of the Ille, when a Gentleman of my Acquaintance told me, ^ 1 would pafs aWay a merry half Hour, he'd jl)ew me a Sight that he believ'd the whole World could not parallels and accordingly he carry’d me to one of their Publick Gamijtg-houfes, not far from the Play-houfi-
The Room was very Commodious and handlbmly furnilh’d, and the majority of the Company were clean, and feme of ’em very tvell dreft, and in truths look’d like Gentlemen: Three or four of them per-ceiving us to be Strangers, and imagining we came to Game, preftntly made up to us* Gentlemen, faj^s one, if you are for trying your Fortune at Farroon, which is one of the fairejl and fnejl Games in the World^ you cannot find any place in Town iwhefe you may venture upon better Profpe&s.
This is the largefi Bank, and the Gentlemen that deal are all Men of Worth and Honour, and above any thing that looks like Trick or Jrt. SajiS another, that I found afterwards was one of their Sweetners, and now and then got a Dinner and half a Crown for making a Set for ’em, If the Gentlemen are for Sporting, I'll put in a couple of Pieces with 'em and well go make .a pufi) at the whole Cargo: They have been broke two or three times this Week already^ arid I have a firong fancy by the run of the Cards, they cant win to Eight,
NowJ
10	A New Voyage to
Now, Sir, you muft know this Farreon is a Game that fbme time paft had been banifli'd out of Francci The Prince of that Country^ who it feems is wiler than to fuffer fiich unlawful Games among his People, was no fooner inform’d of the Milchiefs it had done to the Young Gentlemen and Officers of his Army,, but he publilhes an EdiB., prohibiting all Perfbns under the Penalty of being fent to the GalUes either privately or publickly to play at it. The French Sharpers.y who found the Advantages of it were too valuable to be loft, and judging it right, that there was no Country in Europe fo proper for them to fet up in as the IJlan'd of Fools, preiently make the belt of their way hither, and without any manner of leave or regard to the Laws of the Nation, or the Cuftom of the Country, impudently open their Banks at moft of the great Coffee-Houfes at the Court End of the Town.
The StuJtitians., tho’ they are not very good at In^ vention^ are the beft in the World at Improvements, and fbon found out the Secrets of the Game ^ and accordingly fbme joyn with the French, and others fet up Tables of their own, among which this that I am now fpeaking of is one of the chiefeft, and as my Friend allured me, brings in yearly to the Operators more than two thoufand Pound Sterling.
I am not fb much a Mafter of the Game to be able to inform you what the real Advantages are; but one of the beft Judges among them told me, he had calculated it at about five and twenty per Cent, and farther added, JThat if they could find the Gamefters, the Money was all fafe.
We went up to the Table., where one of the Handy-craft’s Men was then at Work. As near asl could Judge, there was about Fifty Pound in Gold and Siver, lay in two heaps before him, we look’d on for about half
an Hour, in which little Interval we could obferve
feveral
the island of Fools.	i i
feveral Young Sparks that appear’d like Lawyer’s Clerks, or the Prentices of fome Eminent Citizens, lole all their Money, and fome of ’em Summs too conliderable for fuch Youngfters to come fairly by.
When we had flay’d there till they had very near doubled their Bank^ my Friend takes me afide to a private part of the Room ^ Come, fays he^ let’s lit down here and drink a Dilh of Chocolate., and I’ll entertain you a little with the Charaders of fome of the Members of this worthy Society.
You lee that lufty Fellow that’s dealing the Cards there, how affededly he behaves himlelf, and with what formality he a£fs the Gentleman, he’s a kind of a broken Coachman, and take him out of the Bu-linels of a Sharper and you won’t hear a word of good Sence from him in a whole Night’s Converfati-on, nor of one good Adion in his whole Life.
That little meagre Spark that fits at his Elbow, and looks like the PiBure of Envy drawn after Quid’s PeScription, is another of the Fraternity. He was a Partner and Co-operator with one of the moft notorious Cheats this Illand ever had. Since he turn’d
It Moraliffy
Gamejl
much Gravity and Alfurance as if he had commenc’d .^Iajler of the Science. He is indeed a mighty Man with the Conjlables., Beadles, and Baylifs, and has fb effedually brib’d himfelf into their Acquaintance, that he has the Infolence to imagine he has eftablifli’d himfelf and his Partners above the reach of the Law. There are feveral more of this Gang, and moft of ’em broken TradeSmen, but. Sir, my knowledge of them is very flender, and therefore I won’t pretend to give you their particular Charader any further than this. That they make Cheating and Game-
ing the Ible Bulinefs of their Lives, and flick at no-
to promote that Interefl,
C a
You
12
A Mem Voyage to
N
You fee that Spark with the long Wigg, that fwears and curies fb terriblj, and gives ill Language, he i^as bred an Attorney^ and had good BuIineSs till he fell into the Hands of the Gamejiers^ and firft loft his Money and then his CharaBerj and is fince turn’d Sharper.^ and indeed is one of the Vileft in the whole Society. That Fellow that ftands next him is one that has already marry’d leventeen feveral Women, and has had ten times as many Whores and ruin’d ’em all. He in the fine Lac'd Coat was a Bayliff's Followed Hein the Scarlet Cloak a Tm-pe7i7iy Barber, and he
in the Lac’d Hat, with the Siiyer-hilted Sword, a Brd-
ken Vintner.
You fee thole two Gentlemen that fit by thera-filves, one of ’em is a Krtight Laro7tet, of a very Ancient and Honourable Family, and had an Eftate fuitable to his Character, but the poor Gentleman had the misfortune in his Youth to loye Play, and the Sharpers got him into their Clutches, and never left him till they had ftrip'd him of every Shilling, and now he is forc’d to lliift and ftiirk about from one Gaming-houfe to another, and to commit abundance of little pittiful Actions to fupport himfelf. The other is much under the lame Gircumftances,a very honeft ingenious Man,and in his Nature abhors any thing that’s mean or bafe, butthe pure want of Bread, conftrains him to follow this curfed Gang, which I know he does with the utmoft Shame and Regret.
‘ There ftands poor unlucky Tom too, that wants neither good Sence nor good Words toexprels it, and what’s more, is a Sober Man j a Man that if he had turn’d his Head to any other Bufinefs but that of a Qamejier, in all probability he mpft have made his Fortune long before this time, but his hard Fate determin’d him to that way of life,and now he’s undone. Such as theft, I think, ought not to be plac’d in the Rank with cotnmon Sharpers):)\x% fliould r^thej be loqk''^ on as unfortunate than ill Men,
the Ifland of Fools.
15
But there ftands one next to him that has neither Jionefty.^ Sence nor Generojity, nor one good (Lualificar tion fit to recommend him to Human Conversation j he is generally known among ’em by the Title of th& good for nothing Fellow.^ and indeed ’tis the propereft Title they can give him. He has lately got a little Money, no body knows how, which makes him fb intolerably Prow</, Infolent, and lU-mtiiFd, that every body hates and avoids him.
To have done with ’em, I mull needs own to you, that there are Several Reafons that make Gaming their fble BuSinefs, and to Hick at nothing to propagate their Intereft in that way, who abftraSed from that are ojtherwife Men of good Parts and excellent Natural Endowments j but thofe are but very few, and a Man muSl be well acquainted with the Town, and an ex-judge of Men and Things before he can pick ’em out. The Rooki and Scoundrels are by far the greater number, and whafs worfe, encreafe So fad, and are grown of late fo intolerably Rude and Iniblent, and commit So many open Violences and Outrages, that a Stranger that ventures among ’em, runs the risk of being Rob’d or Murder’d.
i^hether this growing Mifchief be moll owing to the Defests of our Laws, the Negligence of the Magistrate, or the Connivance of fome of thoSe they im-ploy, I won’t take upon me to determine ^ but be that as it will. I’m confident the thing in it felf is So highly Scandalous and pernicious in all reSpedls, and refie^s So much upon the JVifdom and Honour of ouf Country.^ that it tends extreamly to llrengthen the Q-pinion the World has of us, and to give us the juft? eSt pretence to the Title of an IJland of Fools.
My Friend had went on further but up comes one they call’d Captain.^ whom we afterwards understood
to be one of the Pentioners to the Bankers^ who was
always iji the Room ready to Fight ox tether Bully
.1	'	Jqj«
V
14
Nevp
If
had a mind to Jit down, there would be room made /< at the Table. Upon which my Friend, who knew the Cuftom of the Place, and as I have been told fince, had formerly pay’d dear for his knowledge, made fbme flight eicufe, and fo we pay’d for our Chocolate and adjourn’d to the Play-houfe, where we fpent the je{t of the Evening.
He had hardly made an end but one of the City Serjeants came to him from the Mayor, to deflre his attendance at the Hall, upon which we took our leaves and return’d direfflj^ to our Inn, in order to prepare pur felves for our Journey againft the Coach let out, which was at fout a Clock the next Mor^ ning.
My Companion and I were the firfl: that went into the Coach, where we fat for about a quarter of an Hour before the Coachman could get the reft of the Paflengers in a readineft. The firft that came was an old Senator and his Chaplain, after him came a Gentleman of the Inns of Court, and after him a Major that was lately landed from Spain, and was going to Court to follicit the payment of the Troops that were in great want of Provifions and all forts of Ne^ eeftaries in that Country.
About Nine we came to a little Burrough Town about fifteen Miles diftant from the Place we fet our, where we refted for about half an Hour, to change the Horfes and to refrelh our felves ^ and here my Companion, who was an old Traveller, took care to inform himfelf concerning the Perfons we were to travel with, and thought no body fa proper for that purpofe as the Landlady, who made no Scruple to tell him freely all fhe knew of them.
The old Gentleman, fays fhe, is a .Member of Parliament for a little Corporation in the Weft. He is one of thofe they call Low-Churchmen, mftly Rick, but good
fit
4
\
nl
the Ifland of Fools.	15
f
for nothhtg; he t>wns the greatejl part of the Place where he is chofe^ and the Inhabitants., who generally hate him^ fend him vp more out of fear than reJpeB. That grum--looking Fellow that’s with him is the Mimjler of his Pa~ tiJI), one that is neither Churchman nor good DiL fenter, but an equal mixture of both.^ and can be ei as his Intereft and the turn of the Times require. Gentleman in Red I doPt know, but the other is a Bar-rifter at Law, and one of the JKorthieJl Men in the Coun^ ty, a well-bred hone^ Gentleman., and an excellent Com^ panion, as you 11 find by Experience befote you come to the end of your fourney.
By this time the Horfes were put on, and the Coachman call’d for us to repair to our Places, fb that my Companion had only time to take me afide for a Minute and give me fome general hints of what he had learnt from the Landlady.
The heft part of this Day was fpent in common! Formalities, and in fiich ^eJHons and Anfwers that are cuftomary for Strangers to ufe one to another.
Wit
Maj
little merrily to the Old Gentleman and his Chaplaift, and endeavour to divert the Company with fome of his Adventures with the Spanijh Ladies.
At Night when we came to the Inn, the Barrijl^, who was an admirable Caterer, with the Confent of the Company, went into the Kitchhtg and order’d the Supper, which with the Wine, Bread, Bear, came to about four Shillings a Head. Our Senator^ with a great many Sighs and wry Faces, threw down his Crown and left his Chaplain to pay the other three Shillings, but withall told us, That if we propos'd to live fo extravagantly upon the Road, he and the DoHov would eat by themfelves.
This fet all the Company into a Laughter, efpecial-1y the Major, who told him, That if he had been with
hiM
i6
A Nen> Voyagk to
\n or two in Spain, he would not ravagant Price for fo good ct Su had fifty times paid a Piflole fc
think fc

was much worfe^ and glad he could get tt at that rate; upon which our Senator, with his Chaplain, left us and retir’d to their Chamber, and we heard no more of either till the next Morning.
The next Day, which was Saturday.^ nothing happen’d worth your notice, only fome little Bickering)? between the Major and Senator.^ which the Barrijier always took care to compromife in order to preferve a’ ood Harmony upon the Road. At Night, as fooit as we came to the the DoBor and his Patron call’d a Separate Room : They had not been there a-bove half an Hour before a MelTenger came from the Bilhop to invite them to Supper with his Lordlhip,-where I fuppofe they Lodg’d too, for we heard no more of them till Monday Morning the Coach was ready to Set outi
The Barrifter.^ who had often travelfd this Road and was very well acquainted in the Town, told us, If we thought proper to take a turn after Stipper^ he knew an honejl Fellow that kept a Tavern, and he would under• take to procure as good a Glafs of Wine as any was in the IJland.
This Motion was no fooner made but agreed to. To after we had regal’d our felves with every thin_ the Houle afforded,we took our Landlord with us and away we went. The Wine was good, and the Fellow was indeed a very honeft merry Fellow: He told us feveral diverting Stories, and particularly fome relating to the Bilhop that were very extraordinary. How far his Reports are to be credited, I leave that to thole that know him better? but if the tenth part of what he affirms of him be true, the Vices of all the Bifhops in the Univerfe amaSs’d together would not make lb monlfrous a Bulk as this lingle Prelate’s? nor
wouM
1


A
tht Ifland of Fools.
17
would any People but an IJlxnd of Natural Fools have fuller’d themfelves to have been fb often milguided by fiich an Impoftoi:. But, Sir, I’m afraid I prefs too far upon your Leifure, fb I’ll defer the reft till the next Poft;
My Lord, I am with the mojl
profound regard, &c.
\

E T T E R
II.
My Lord,
Will not trouble you with the little Occurrences of . the next day, which we fpent chearfully in walking about the Town, and in viewing the Chureh, particularly the Spires which is the higheft, and one of the beft pieces of Workmanlhip I ever law j in the Kvening we return’d to our Inn, and went early to Bed, in order to be ready for the Coach in the Morning, which our Landlord told us would fet out by Three a Clock at the fartheft.
The Senator and the Do&or were before-hand with us, and had fix’d themfelves in two of the beft Places, before the Coachman or any body in the Houfe knew of their coming. We travelled the firft Twelve Miles in the Dark, and fo loft the Profpedl of one of the fineft parts of the Ifland. About Nine we ftop’d for an Hour, in which time a Gentleman that was riding exprefs, brought News that the Stultkia7ts had certainly concluded a Separate Peace with the Gauls^ which we perceiv d was a mighty Mortification to our Senator.
The Major, who took all opportunities to make himftlf Merry with him, as fbon as we were fettled
D	in

A 1Sevt> Voyage to
in our Places began to exclaim terribly againff the ill Condud of the War, and to recite a world of fbolilh Managements j infomuch, that the Old Gentleman grew very Tefty, and told him, That he was 710 true btultitian that was for the conclujion of a Peace before the frji Lttentions of the War were anfwed.d^ and made Life of feveral of the. Arguments, which as I afterwards found, were the common Cant of his Party, to llrengthen his Aflertion.
To which the Major Reply’d. That nothwlthJlanL ing be was an Officer^ and got his Bread by the War.^ he was too much a Friend to his Native Country, to dsjire the continuance of it upon any oj his PretenfoJis, Sir, lays he, Pll be very free with you, in all the Countries where I have been, the Stultitians are looPd upon as a common Property 5 and that to gratifie the Ambition of a few covetous defgnbig Knaves and Rafcals, the fnejl Nation in the World has beeri reduced to the laji Extremity.
true, the confant Succejfes that have attended the Stultitian Arms, have filPd the European World with the higheji Bjieem of the Bravery of their Soldiers ^ but on the other hand, they fay, that no Nation but the Ifle of Fools would have tamely Jhjfefd thetnfelves to have been fo fcandahujly impofed upon, and fquandefd away fo much of their Wealth, and fo many of the Lives of thefe Gallant Men in the fupport of a Caufe, which they could never expeB to gain any thing by, but Ruine and Contempt. .
This let the Old Gentleman into a terrible fit of
/
railing for half an Hour, without fiiffering any body to put in a Wordj fays he, I lole my Patience, when I hear the Officers of the Army pretend to argue at this Rate. You Soldiers, if you can get the Nation’s Money, and live Great, and ffirut about in your Lac’d Coats, and make a fine (hew, you think your bufinels is done, and perhaps you may imagine
• too


the Ifland of Fools.
IQ
too, that if they do clap up a Peace, we’ll be fuch Fools to maintain you afterwards j but. Sir, Til tell you, you’ll find two words to that Bargain. If we have no War we have no occafion for Soldiers. They are a dangerous People in a time of Peace, and more, elj^edally at a Juncture when the Nation is under fo many Jealoufies and Apprehenfions,
<Srr, Replys the Barnjler.^ I don’t pretend to Politicks 5 my Bufinels, and indeed my Inclination tend another way 5 neverthelefs I muft beg leave to tell you, I differ from you exceedingly in this Affair. If ever the Stiiltitiam had a real occafion for an Army, ’tis now, when there’s fb many Arts and Stratagems us’d to Stir up Commotions, and to fill the People’s Heads full of Jealoufies and Apprehenfions.
You that are a Senator.^ whole peculiar bufinels it ought to be to inform your felf into the State of your Country, cannot be unfenfible, but that there is a ftrong Party among us, that are extreamly exa' fperated, and that would flick at no Methods to gra-tifle their Revenge, and withall are labouring by all manner of ways and means to bring over the People to their Interelf. In fuch a cafe, I hope you will not think it Prudent for any Government to leave themfelves defencelefs. I know a flanding Army has been always an Averfion to the Stultitiajts^ and perhaps if our Malitia were regulated as they ought to be, there would be no need of one : but till matters come to be intirely fettled, in my Opinion, it would be a very hazardous Experiment to venture to turn fb many Perfons of defperate Circumflances loofe into the World at once to feek their Bread. What the confequence of that may be no Man knows, and I am unwilling to fuggeft.
If you are for a Regulation, there I heartily agree wiih you, and look upon it to be abfolutely necef-, I will readily grant you, that there have been
D 2	abrni'
20	Nejii? Voyage ta
abundance of Men of corrupt and fcandalous Principles that have been artfully introduc’d both into the Fleet and Army. Men that are profeft Enemies to to the Conftitution, and to the true intereft of their Country, and have openly declar’d themfelves as fuch upon all Occafions. Such as thefe, I think, ought immediately to be difplac’d, and Perlbns of Loyalty and Integrity put into their Polls : and with Submillion to our prelent Governoiirs^ I take it to be a very high Refledlion upon their Condud, that it has been delay’d lb long. If any misfortune Ihould happen upon that Account, they’d certainly be the firfl that would be involv’d in the Calamity.^ and perhaps have realbn to repent if when it is too late.
The Do&or^ who to the belt of my remembrance, had not favour’d the Company with one word, for the whole Morning, began now to open furioully 3 applying himfelf to his Patron. ^Says he, ’Tis plain
*	•/	^	j	X	-
what thefe Gentlemen drive at, they are all Birds of the fame Feather, and ’tis but .Spending your Breath to ho purpole, to fay any thing more to ’em. You find, S'ir, they are^br a Regulated Fleet and Army., a Regulated Mlmjlry., and I believe would be glad of a Regulated Senate too. But what is all this Regulation for, but to dellroy Liberty and Property, and to introduce Popery and the Pretender } But let ’em look to it, we are not to be Regulated out of our Senfes at that rate. You and I can remember the time when there was not the tenth part of the Probability there is now, when a certain Prince was banilli’d his Kingdom upon lefs Provocations.
Thefe Gentlemen’s Arguments put me in mind of what I have often heard your Worlhip intimate formerly, that if ever the Deiigns of the Late ML niftry Mifcarryed, it would be purely owing to themfelves. They had once the foie Power in their own
Hands, but wanted Courage and Refolution to make
■	the
the Ifland of Fools.	21
the moft of their Advantages, and now they fiifFer for it, and who can help ’em.
If your Advice had been follov/d, our General had ftill kept his Commilfion, and our Noble Friends their Polls; and you and I, and all that wifh well to the GOOD OLD CAUSE, might have had fome profpeffs of Requital for our Expence and Trouble : but that time’s paft, and God knows whether ever the like opportunity may offer again, indeed I don’t expect to fee it in my time.
In this kind of wrangling DiScourfe we fj^ent the time till the Coachman ftop’d at a little HouSe upon the Road, to light his Pipe, and take a Dram. The Old Gentleman who knew the Mafter call’d for 3 Bottle of his March Beer to drink the Company’s Healths, and their good Journey •, adding, that it was ufual for Perfons that travel in a Stage-Coach to fall into Dilputes, and fbmetimes to Squabble, and that if he had faid any thing that had given offence, he was forty for’t, and asked Pardon.
The Drink was exceeding Strong, and very Palatable j I think the heft of the fort I had tailed Since I came to the IJland, and my Companion the Boglan-der obferving the Old Gentleman and his Chaplain fuck it down with a great deal of Satisfadion, re-folves they fhould have their Bellies full, and accordingly orders the Fellow to bring every Man his Bottle. Come, fays he. Gentlemen, fince a General Peace is concluded among us, I think we can do no lefs than
take a Glafs or Two to its happy Continuance. If
you’ll give me leave. I’ll begin a Health that I believe will be acceptable to every Body. Herds Pro^ fperity to the Ifland of Fools. A good Health indeed., fays the DoSIor, andwe are much ohlifd to you for it; and I II ajfure yon. Sir, notwithftanding thefe little Bickerings, therds no body drinks it with more pleafure than
^ie Sfik? md iSAf, 'Phe Six Bottles were off in
an
22
-4 NetP Voyage to
\
an Inftant, and the Fellow who took the Hint, had cunningly replac’d ’em with fix more 5 which with a great deal of difficulty I took my Share of; but my Lord, I mufl: own to you, though I was willing to carry on the Humour, I never did a thing with greater uneafienefs.
When we had finilh’d the lafl Sis Bottles, the Senator would have call’d again; but the Coachman prevented his Motion, by telling us if we flay’d longer 5 we fhould be late at our Inn, and the Roads were dangerous: upon which we pay’d, and the Coach drove away. We had not gone above half a Mile, but the Sudden EfFefls of this potent Liquor began to appear in the whole Company j but more particularly in the Old Gentleman, and the Doctor, whole, An-tick Behaviour and Ridiculous Stories and Jells, upon one another, furniSh’d us with Diversion for the left of the Afternoon.
When we came to our Inn, the Landlord, who prefently obServ’d that the Senator and his Chaplain had been taking a GlaSs, calls my Companion afide, and told him; if you are for being^ merry to ISIight, you never had a better Opportunity. If you can manage the matter rightPenury and Clumfey (as he calls the Senator and his Chaplain ) have been dabling aU ready and if you can perfwade ^em to take a Bottle or Two of my Strong Ale.^ which 1 know they both heartily love^ that will pin the Bajket.^ and then yoifll have fport enough. And trulyLandlord, fays he, 1 wont be long before I try the Experiment, Ifee they are gone into the Kitchin, to the Fire, Ell follow ^em do you be within call and Til warrant you we’ll manage the matter.
This was no fooner concluded but up he makes to the Old Gentleman ^ and calling for the Landlord, told him that they had met with a Glals of the beft Liquor at a little Houle upon the Road, that he had tailed in all his Travels; and as . the favour was ow-
ing
island
^5
Ing purely to this Worthy Senator.^ the Gentlemen have fent him to return him their hearty Thanks, and to delire his Company. The DoBor who often took upon him to anfwer for his Patron, began at firft to raife fome Scruples; but his Worfhip who was ftill under the Dominion of the .March Beer., made no Exr ceptions, but bid him tell the Gentlemen that they did him a great deal of Honour, and that he would
attend them immediately.
In a few Minutes the Senator and his Chaplain
came in to us ^ and after we had order’d fomething for Supper, we call’d for the Landlord to know what he had got in the houfe to drink ^ whotofd us he had very good Wine of all forts, but that which he could chiefly recommend to us was fbme Ale of his own Brewing, that was now in the Perfe£Hon. His Wor-fays he, has often been pleajed to Jhp at my HoufCy and I hope will do me the JuJiice to allow., that there is not an Inn upon the Road that can compare with me for Malt Liquors,
Landlord, fays he. Good Wine wants no Bufi-, if your Ale be good it will recommend it jelf go therefore and bring us a couple of Soldiers Bottles, which the Company fall give me leave to prefent 'em with., for a Specimen : be Jure to go upright, as we fay in the Weft, and remember your Reputation's at fake.
The Ale was brought in, and indeed it was exceeding fine, and very pleafant, and much ftronger than moft of our common Wines ^ and I mu ft be ingenious with your Lordfnp, if I had not often fhifted my Glafs, and manag’d with a great deal of Circum-fpedlion, I found it would foon grow too potent for me.
Before the Supper could be got ready, as near as I remember, we had difpatch’d about ten Bottles j of which I am confident, as matters were order’d, the Squire and the DoBor had at leaft a double fhare, and
be-
24
New
began to be both very Troublelbme and Ridiculous j but my Lord, I Ihould be more fb than either to trouble you with the Particulars : I will therefore omit the recital of their Antick Tricks, Bawdy Jeffs, and Obicene Difcourfe' before Supper, and only carry you to the end of the Farce.
After Supper our Landlord had prepar’d a couple of ftroling Fidlers, which he order’d to ftrike up at the Door, and wilh his Worlhip a happy Journey, and a fafe Return. The Senator no fooner bear’d ’em, but he order’d them to be call'd in, and directed them to play Oliver"s March, the Duke of Mon-moiitFs Gigg, and feme of the Tunes that had been lately Compos’d for the .Calves-head Solemnity. Our Boglander to humour the matter lung feveral Catches in his own Language, and danc’d one of his Country dances, which he perform’d with a great deal of Dexterity. Nay, faith fays the Squire, ■ if you are for that /port, my Parfon and'I will Jitew you a few of our Country Steps •, and out he lugs the Do&or, and tho’ he could hardly ftand, nothing would ferve but he muff take a turn with him: Come Boys.^ fays he, play Bobbing Jone, a)id pray Parfon mind your Steps. Here I confefs a Man muft have been more than a Stoick^ to have kept his Temper ^ in the whole courle of my Life I never faw any thing fb exactly Foolifh, and I defie all the Poets and Painters in Italy to deferibe fuch a Scene. While they were Hopping, Jumping, and Tumbling about in the moft prxpofterous manner, it unluckily happen’d that Clumbfey\ zs the Landlord call’d him, chanc’d to tread upon his Patron’s Toes. Confound your Heavinefs, fays he, you have murder d me if the whole Church bad fallen, Ifmtld not have felt it half fo much.
Though this was a perfect Accident, it was with fome difficult}?’ that we got the Old Gentleman into Temper again 5 he gave the Do&or abundance of
hard

the island of Foof$.
25
A
hard Words, and the DoBor as often return’d his Complements 5 however, by the interceflion of the Landlord, and the reft of the Company, they were made Friends, and the Squire took off a Bumper to Spilpui-^ ing's Health, as a mark of his Reconciliation.
By this time we thought it proper to difmifs the Fidlers.^ and by our Landlord’s Advice, to call for the Reckoning. It feems, he had feen the Squire in his Altitudes formerly, and knew fb much of his Temper, that if the Houfe was not difcharg’d before he had Slept upon’t, and was grown cool, he would fufpedt he had been impos’d upon, and it would be very difficult to prevail with him to pay his Club.
The Bill came to fix and twenty Shillings, which the Senator taking into his Hand, threw back again to the Landlord with Contempt. Gentlemen.^ fays he, ‘tis below the Dignity of a Stultitian Senator, when he has a mind to enjoy himfelf.^ to fuffer any body to pay with him* This Motion was ftrongly oppofed by every one but the DoBor^ who either took it for a bounce of his Patrons, or elfe Jiad a mind to lave his own Pocket, and lb encourag’d it. To make Ihort of the Story, the Squire cut a hole in the tVaft^ band of his Breeches.^ and pull’d out a couple of Pieces and pay’d all *, upon which I left ’em, and retir’d to my Chamber.^ whither the Barrijler follow’d me as foon as he could conveniently get away: my Companion the Major, and the Landlord ftay’d it out, and as they inform’d u6 in the Mornitig, had a world of diverting Scenes^ between the Senator and the DoBor^ till they grew both lb throughly drank, that the Coachman and Oaftlers were forc’d to be call’d in to carry them up to their Lodging.
Pardon me, my Lord, for trelpafling Sb long upod your Leilure, my next will bring you the Detail of my Conference with the Barrijler, with ain Account of
£	ous


our arrival at the Metropolis ^ which fhall tranfinitted to you by the firft Poll, hy
Dated from the Metropolis of the IJland of Fools^ the 12 th of ohob. 1712.
LordJJ)ip^s mojl
Obedient Servant

.1
E T T E R.
III.
3fy Lord,
Troubl’d you in my laft with a tedious Account of our third Day’s Journey and the merry Adven-^ tores we had with the Senator and his Chaplain j which, tho’ I muft acknowledge they were utterly too trivial for j^our Lordftiip’s Ear, and highly Impertinent 5 yet by the ufe I lhall be oblig’d to make of ’em in the Description of the Policy, Government, and pre-fent State of the Stultitians, I hope you will be pleas'd to admit of ’em among the reft of theirs and my Fooleries.
■ The Barrijler, as I before intimated, having fecret-ly withdrawn himfelf from the Drunken Society, retir’d diredly into my Appartment, and propos'd the taking a quiet Bottle of Wine before we went to our Beds; a Propofal, which for feveral Reafons I readily comply’d with, but particularly that I might have the opportunity of a Separate Hour with him, who
our firft Interview I had oblerv’d to be a Per-
ibn of great Modefty and Affability, and of excellent Endowments both Natural and Acquir’d.
I found he fpoke moft of the European Languages extreamly well, efpecially that of the Gauls.^ in which %e convers’d. Sir, fays hr, you have been an Eye-Wit-nefs of the extravagant Follies of two of our Countrymen
the Ifland of Fools.
27
trymen, and without a great deal of Candour and Good-humour muft naturally conclude, that you are fall’n into a very ridiculous Corner of the World. I will not indeed offer any thing in Apology for rhis unpolilh’d Senator and his Chaplain.^ or endeavour to excufe our felves in the general from a World of hairbrain’d inconliderate Aflions we have been no" torioufly guilty of, which I am fenfible we muft be juftly condemn’d and cenfufd for in all Foreign Countries. But, Sir, if I thought I (hould not be troublefome, I would venture to lay before you a few of my own Obfervations, which I look upon to be moft material, and leave it to your felf to make the proper Inferences.
As to this Senator and his Chaplain I muft own, a Stranger would be apt to form very odd Ideas of us, if he was to look no further than their Behaviour upon the Road j but as this would be a very unequal way of judging, I hope you won’t make them your Standard tooneafure our whole Country by. ’Tis true, the Knaves and Fools are by far the greater Kumber ^ but ftill we have both in the Senate-houfe and in the PPieJlbood, Perfons of great Learning and Probity: and I hope our general Chara6ler is not yet funk fo low, but there are thofe in the World will do us the Juftice ftill to believe it.
Here I thought proper to reply., That tho’ the Ghara-£ler of the Stultitians was much leflen’d of late, and their unfteady Behaviour to their Princes., their frequent Rebellions and Revolutions, their FaBions and Parties, their unfaithful Proceedings in the management of the State, and their ungenerous Behaviour one to ano^ ther, had fpread themfelves very far, and were become generally prejudicial to ’em •, yet I never heard but that there were among ’em more Perfons of profound Learning and great Abilities than were to be found in all the World befide. Sir, I hope you’ll par-
E 2	don
a8
New
don this Freedom in a Stranger. The intent of my
Voyage is not to fraight my Self home with ufelefs Speculations, but to improve my Knowledge^ if you’ll therefore be pleas’d to favour ine with fome fhort direDions how I may manage my felf with the moft advantage when I come to your great Town, which is every where efteem’d as the Emporium of the World, you will add very much to the Honour you now do me, and will oblige me in the moft effedual manner, firfi: to deferve and theii to improve our future Converfatioh. Without the leajl heftation be made
dnfaer., That a Gentleman of my Experience and Qualifications could want no Inftrudions to enable iiim to make my Paflage with Safety and Advantage into any Country; efpecially fuch Inftruftions as his were, that he was fenfible were exceedingly imperfeQ: and ill chofen: But, Sir, that you may fee how willing I am to comply with your Requeft, I will for once expofe my felf to your Cenlure, and rather run the hazard of being thought Impertinent than difb-blige you.'	"
In all probability your firft Curiofity will lead you to the Court, under the miftaken notion, that you may pollibly meet' with feveral things there worthy the oblervatiori of a Stranger. The Palace it felf has little to recommend it befide the Antiquity of the Place, and is ‘much inferiour to feveral of our Noble-inens Seats, efpecially to thofe that have been lately eredled upon the Crown Lands, whole Foundations began in Rapine^ Bribery and Extortion.^ and whole Walls continued and were cemented by the Blood and Spoiles of a poor deluded Ignorant People. The Situath on is tolerable, tho’ infinitely inferiour to the ancient Seat of our Princes, that now lies bury’d in its bwn Ruines, and is a conftaht refleftioii upon the Wifdom and Loyalty of the Stultitian Senate.^ and ah
undeniable Argument, that the high regard that fome
nL- .	1-;,?	■ ■■;	' People’
V'X ’	*
•9 '
the Ifland of Fools.
20
People pretend for the preservation of the Memory of the Royal Family, is meet Banter and Grimace. When you come to Town, if you turn your Eyes that way, Vm confident you’ll be fadljr affeded, and be apt to conclude with me ^ That the Stultitians have been ex-treamly negligent, that amidft the Immenfe Summs they have yearly given under the Notion of carrying on a ridiculous War, or rather, that have been artfully extorted from them upon that pretence, they have not appropriated fbme fmall part towards re-. building this famous Strudure.
The Stultitian Court is Such a confus’d Medly, and luch a ftrange mixture of Perfons of all Sorts and Qualifications jumbl’d together, that ’tis impofiible for the greateft mafters of Realbn and Experience to form any right Judgment,or give any tolerable account of ’em. In one place fits an old Statefman, one that wants neither Learning nor good Sence,, and very few either Natural or Acquir’d Endowments that are requifite to qualifie him for his high Poll, or recommend him to the Clofet of the greateft Prince in the World ; but then as a foile to all his Perfedions, he is fo insufferably proud, peevifh and ill-natur’d, and what’s worft of all, fo intolerably Covetous, that he Hands as ’twere in a Parenthejis between his Equals and his Inferiours, and is almoft every bodies Aver-Hon^ unlefs it be a few Mercenaries that he maintains on purpoSe to indulge his Spleen. In the next place to him fits one that is the dired reverie of him, and fb exadly oppofite to him in all refpeds, that if you did not fee they were made after the fame form, you’d hardly believe ’em of the fame Species ; no body comes to him without a Smile, or leaves him without a Promise i and if his Performances are but equal to the fiidden Efteem he has acquir’d both from the i?rince and People, the next Age will look upon him as a Prodigy 5 but. Sir, as he is wrapt up in Myfte-
nes
iO
A Netp Voyage to
ties, I will not attempt to give you any part of his Chard&er: Time the Mother of Truth is big with his
Hifiory, and mull e’er long be deliver’d ^ in which Interval youll be certain to meet with many different Accounts both of his Virtues and Vices as well as the
Wifdom, Folly and Succels of his great Underta-Jdngs. In another place fits a JunSto of new Politicii-ans i what (Qualifications they may have the Publick is not yet acquainted wfith: Honejiy is their beji Polit% and tho’ Virtues and Vices have been appropriated to moll of the great Men in the World when Intereft held the Scale, yet Prudence and Juftice Hill turn d the Ballance. The Aphorifin is jLpry old, I confels, hut the Application is always new, and will continue fo, till the Covetoufnefs and Ambition of Cour-
tiers and Statefinen lhall intirely ceafe, which I’m a-fraid I lhall never live to lee, elpecialiy in this degenerate Ille.

Sir, I would not flop you too long at a Place, where you that are a Stranger can make fo few Improvements ; for unlefs you knew the Perfons, the manner and caules of their Promotion, and their refpeflive Characters and Qiialifications, ’tis impolfible you Ihould be able to judge of’em. It can fignifie little to you to tell yduj that the Lord with the long NoSe and the Ibrrowful Countenance is a confounded Hypocrite, and playing Tricks with both Parties to fill his own Pockets. That the fpruce dapper Spark that’s daub’d frorri Head to Foot with Lace and Imbroyde-

ry, is but a Ibrt of a Chymical Operator^ a very ^lack in Politicks.^ arid like Pfop's Daw.^ Ifruts about in borrow’d Plumes.
I might Ihew you at a diftance leve-ral of our Prince’s Menials and Officers of the Guards
that are Perfons of Scandalous and Profligate Lives, and of Rebellious and Antimonarchial Principles,
and tire you with the? different Characters and Di-
teriptions qf thp Fools and Knavp that at this time in-
'I
the island of Fools.	51
fell the Royal Falace *, but. Sir, lince you are, to be in Town your Self in a Day or two, and will have a full opportunity to make your own Obfervations, we'll leave it till then.
I know you are too gOod a Judge of the Coriftitu-tion and Nature of all Courts, to imagine, that the wifell Prince that ever govern’d^ can fo effedually model his Family, but that abundance of Knaves and Fools^ and other vfelefs Terfons., will crowd in upon him, and like divided parcels of dying Vipers, fpraul together towards their Head. Some Princes, by the prudent distribution of their Rewards and PimiJIments^
.Men of .Mt
Mifchiefs
and Inconvemendes that have happen’d upon this account 5 whilft others have been undone, and their whole Family expos’d and banifh’d, chiefly by the falfe and perfidious Advice of their treacherous Conn-fellors,^ and the ungrateful and faithlels Behaviour of their Creatures and Servants-, a fatal Inflance of which I could lay before you in a late Prince of this Ifland 5 but. Sir, it grows late, and I won^t detain you now with the melancholy Recital. The poor Stultitians owe all the Chalamities they have already adtually felt, and the dreadful Profpeds of future Miferies which they have ftill caufe to apprehend, to the good Nature,and Credulity of that miffaken Prince. I heartily willi his Misfortunes may be a Handing caution to his Pofterity, not to depend too much, and place their foie Security upon the deceitful Counfels of any Sele£l Number or Party of Mercenary Courtiers or Upjiart Politkians.
We are now bleft with one of the belt Princes that ever adorn’d the Stultitian Throne: A Prince whole Reign has been one continued Series of great and won-dertul Events, and has done every thing that was poffible to promote the Happinefs and Glory of the
People.
k
52	, A New Voyage to
People. And would you imagine, that after all this, this very Prince Ihould be ill us’d, vilely treated and affronted j and that there fhould be a Party among us lb defperately tricked, and lb intirely lojt to all fenfe of Honour and Gratitude.^ that there is hardly a Week pades but fbme Flot or Conjpiracy^ or fbme DeviliJI) Con* trivance is let on foot to imbroil the Nation and fub-vert the Conftitution	When you come to our Metro*
polis^ you’ll be confounded and fiirpriz’d at thele mon* ilrous Proceedings; but. Sir, the Faffs are notorious, and as plain as Demonftration can make ’em. I appeal to your lelf therefore, are we not in reality an IJland of Fools and Madmen to fuffer all this with Impunity ; and what Account will our Governours give of their Conduff, if by their Timidity or artificial Delays, we fhould, after the Deluge of Blood that has been Ipilt, and the incredible Sums that have been extorted from the Nation, and extravagantly Iquander’d away in the fupport of a few Ravenous.^ Dejigning^ Beggarly Accomplices: whom Experience has too late inform d us, had no other Friendihip or Regard for us, than to Serve their own Purpoles, and to fatten and indulge themfelves upon our Spoiles j if after all this thefe Vipers fhould be fuffer’d to reunite and gather frefh Strength and Vigour, what can the Conlequence be but unavoidable Ruine and Dell ruflion?
Oh foolilh Stidtitians! what Magick, what powerful Philtrum is it that has lb fatally benumb'd and Infatuated you ^ Believe me. Sir, I mention thefe things with the deepeft regret. Our whole Ifland is corrupted and over-run with Vice and Folly. Our Laws, that once were, and now fhould be, the Standard of Juftice and Reafon, are bafely fubverted, and in moft Cafes made a perfedl Subterfuge to Cheats and Villains. Our Priefts have untaught their own Doctrines and for (wore their Principles: They have fa-
crifi^’d
the Iflarid of FOols.
n
trifiz’d thfeir Faith and their Consciences to their In-tereft, and made a Merchandife of their Religion, Our Merchants, once the wealthieft in the World, are moft of’em become Fugitives and Bankrupts. Our ManufaQures, in many Places are quite loft, and in moft funk fb low, that the poor Artificer cannot fubfift upon ’em; (Our Foreign Commerce is almoft Utterly deftroy’d, and can never be reftor’d without the concurrence of a world of unforeleen AccidentSi The great Branches of our Trade, that for a Succeffi-on of Ages, have fupporied the Grandure of our Nati-bn, and render’d us valuable both at home and abroad is dwindl’d into Monopoly and Stock-Jobbing 5 and OUT Lxchan^e, once the greateft Mart in the World;^
frequented only by a fevr Indigejtt Scoundrels.^ or filch bfelefs idle People that come thither to ftoek themfelves with the Occurrences of the Town, and to barter and prate about Parties and Politicks. Our Stage, that was intended chiefly for the Diverfion and Reception of bur Ladies and Gentlemen of Quality, is become the common Receptacle of Sharpers.^ Bullies, Whores and Bawds', the original.Defign is quite loft, and from being a School of Moral Virtues and Good Manners, and a Place for the Reprefentation of Noble and Generous Bions., is intirely chang’d into Farce and Ridicule, and made the very Sink of Ribaldry and Obfcene Talk^ and an Inlet to all manner of Prophanenejs and Immorality^ By this time the Clock had ftruck Twelve,' and one of the Waiters came up to us, and told us, That the Coach would be going by Four in the Morning 5 and fb after I had, in the beft manner I could, fignify’d to him the fence I had of his Friendship, and the Satif* faDion I took in his Converfation^ we went to Bed^ where we had not been above three Hoursj but we were call’d up in order to get our felves in a readi-fieSs againft the time that our Governour, the Goach* ftiould think fit to call for us:
f
Ifetv Voy
For the greateft part of the Morning, Nothing
notice. About Nine,
whilfl: we were in the middle of a famous Heath j
which as I afterwards underftood, is commonly in-fefied with a fort of Gentlemen, like Robbers.^ which
IJlanders	_	„
the Coachman told us he had difcover’d upon the lide of the Hill, three Perfons on Horfe-back, which he
thought might be Thieves.^ and that they were croL
Lng the Roads to meet the Coach; this put all the
Company into great Confufion, ’till the .Major told
if we would foil
our Security.
fghtzng I befeech
lays the Senator, I had much Father part with my JIo<^
ife 5 if thefe
thef ll Jlrip tis, and cut our Throats.^ I have a world of
for our IaJi
f
ji
f your Sins.^ and your Judgments.^ fays the Ma-
f either j if
f the Coach and take your fate
fe. This Gentleman, meaning the Bogie, and I have a Brace of Piftols,
very confident'.y when thefe Sparks fee felves into a Bofiure of Defe
ture upon us. Upon this we all ftep^d out of the Coach, and the Major gave me one of his Pifiols, and defir’d
me not to fire ’till I was fecure not to mils my Mark. As he judg’d it, fo it happen’d; for the Fellows coming up with the Coach, and finding no body in if
turn’d their Horfes, and came back diredly to us 5 but perceiving we had Jrms, and were reiolv’d to
upon our Guard, they gave us two or three hearty Curfes, and fb left us.
I will trouble your Lordihip no farther with any of
the little Occurrences upon the Road j being conicious to
my felf, that I have already trelpafs’d too far upon
you-

the island of Fools.
55
you in that particular. About three in the Aftefinoon, we came to this famous City, from whence I hope in a fhort time to be able to communicate to your Lord-fhip, fome Affairs of greater Importance, and more to your SatisfaQion, and mils no opportunity to fig^ nifie, that I am, with the molf profound RefpeCt,
Dated from the Metropolis of the Ifle of Fools. Febr,. the ipth, 1712.
My Lord, Tour mojl Obedient Servant^
Le
T T E R
At	*	r
IV.
.My Lord,
\
After we had quitted the Coach and drank a
Bottle of Canary, which the Old Gentleman presented to the Itlajor as an acknowledment of the fig-nal Service he had done him in protecting him from the Robbers ♦, the Barrijler perceiving that I was under fome uneafinefs for want of a Lodging, told me that he had two Reds in his Chambers, which I ftjould take my choice of, and Should be welcome to Ifay there till I had an opportunity to make a better Provision.
This uneipeded Friendihip from a' Stranger confirm’d me in the efteem I already had for him, and added very much to the Impr.eflions- his generous Behaviour upon the Road had made upon me. I would have made Some Apologies, but he fbon prevented me, by telling me i That he look’d upon good
Manners and Civilities to Strangers to be a common Puty, which we owe one to another, and that if I would be pleas’d to accept of hi§ QhSer, the obliga-
V
tion would lie on his Side.
F 2
L . I * V
Whiia
A Nevt> Voyage to
Whilft we made this Ihort ftay at the Inn, we wer^ infefted with Swarms of ragged People, that crowd--ed impudently into our Room to fell us Pamphlets and Nem.Papers. I would have bought feveral of ’em j but the Matter of the Houle told me they were nothing but Shams and Forgeries, published by fome Knavilh^ Beggarly, Printers.^ purely to geta Penny. As this was a thing perfectly riew to me, and what I had never heard or feen in any other Country, L could not forbear asking upon what Account, and by what Authority thefe Scandalous People were permitted. Your Lord-knows that at Venice., and in all other parts of the World where they have any fort of Oeconomy, the
Printing Prefs |8 always Sacred to the State*, and that liich a Scandalous Practice as this would be look’d upon as a very high Refle£Hon upon the y^if* dom of the Government, and the Authors punifti’d with the’utmoft Severity. 5|V, Replys the Barrifter,
’tis not Ior nothing we have the CharaBey of an Ifland of Fools: when you come tofknow us throiig}d.,y., youU be convinced., we have the jitfejl Title to it. This, though it has put the Nation into the greateft Confufion and Diffaflion, and fill’d the People’s Heads full of Whimfies and Chimera’s, is but a petty incpnfidera-ble Folly, in relpeO; of fome you’ll meet with. Upj on what Account, and by what Authority thefe Scan--dalous People are permitted, leant very well inforip : I know indeed for what purpofes the Praflice was at firft introduc’d, and vyhat mifehieyous Effeds it has had i but how it comes to be continued now, | proteft I can give no' reafon. We have been told indeed that fome of our keeneft State Politicians are terribly troubled with the fuyor Scyibetidi^ and promote the Latitude of the Prefs^ in order to conceal theinSelves, Others, they fay, are no lefs fond of being thought Authors, apd f^ncy it to be an high Article ip their Reputation to be a Father to thp p.r^t§ of fome
V I
the Ifland of Fools.
3f
poor indigent Scribler, which they imploy to write for ’em : and his odds too, when he has huzza’d them almoft to BlaSphemy, and flock’d the Kingdom with lying Panygericks.^ in their Commendation \ praifed them for Vertues they never had, and for great Actions, they never thought of, but that, as foon as they grow into Power, and the filly Coxcomb has rais’d their Reputation, and done their Bufinefs, they intended him for, but they find fome pretence or other to turn him out of their Favour, and perhaps load him with Reproaches into the Bargain, and lb his Credit’s loft, and he grows Contemptible, and mull: be forc’d to Icribble Madrigals and Elegies for Bread, or throw himfelf upon the mercy of lome Knavifh Mercenary Bookfeller, that makes him his Slave and his Property, and if poflible, ufes him worfe than he was before. Many inftances of this I could produce, and * fbme of ^em of Perfons of as good Learning and Parts as ever the IJland Bred., that have been utterly loft, and dy’d ftarving in a Garret upon this Account.
The Senator would have offer’d us fome of his Ar^ guments in vindication of the liberty of the Prefs; particularly that the Revolution, and many other conliderable Events lince, were in a great meafure owing to it: but my Companion, the Boglander, interrupted him, by telling him j This was no proper time to enter into long Disputes, but that if the Company would meet in a day or two, and dine together, they would then have an opportunity to talk over this platter at length. This Propofal was approv’d, and readily agree’d to by the whole Company, and the day and place appointed j and fb we took our leaves, pnd my Friend the Barrijler, for as yet I can call him by no other Name, order’d a Hackney Coach to be call’d, and direDed the Fellow to. drive us directly to hi
We
§
A Nem Voyage to
We had hardly drove a hundred Paces, but I ob-ferv’d prodigious numbers of the milerable Creatures I before mention’d to you, running about with great inindles of Papers under their Arms j fome crying a View Mail from Frogland.y with the King of the GauVs iNew Propofals 5 others Peace and Popery.^ or the Preten-iter’s New Declaration 5 others, that we are all undone at lajl by the ^een and Farliament, or a full and true Difcovery of a horrid and bloody Plot: and abun-ffance of other Papers, with thele fort of Titles ^ which as I was afterwards told, were moft of them Printed and difpers’d, at the Expence of the Phana-ficks., to raife Jealoufies and Apprehenfions among the Tradelmen, and ordinary fort of Pebple.
I will not now detain your Lwdfnp with the Ma? nificence of the Houles, the vaft numbers of the People we met, the fumptuoufnefs of the Shops, and the largenels and regularity of the Streets through which we pafs’d, becaufe I intend to trouble you with a general Defcription of the Tpwn, as foon a§ I have furnifh’d my felf with the proper Materials. in a fhort time we came near to the place where we were to be Set down, where we were Hop’d for a quarter of an Hour, by a mighty concourfe of Coaches that frequently crowd the Streets, in that part of the City, and hinder all Pallage^ during which, we were encountered with another Accident, which I take to be not only a Refledion upon the Stul-titian Policy, but likewile one pf the moft inhuman
Proceedings I ever heard of In a little Adey oppoftte to us, we faw a Tumult pf People, and feveral among ’em with Clubs and drawn Swords.^ Swearing and Blalpheming in the moft dreadful manner. The Barrifer call’d to a Perlbii that ftood near ns, to know the caule j who told us, they were Baylifs andcConJlables^ that had feiz’d a poor Gentleman with an Efcape Warrant, and for endea-' ■	'	'	• ‘	vouring
t tie iriand of Fools
39
vouring to get away from them, had Cut and Beat him fo intolerably, that it was apprehended they had murder’d him. My Friend fhookhis Head, adding 5 That this is another of our FollieSy and a mojl noto^ rious one too; and indeed.^ fays he, I don^t believe the whole World can produce one Paralel to it: the time and circumftance of the place would not permit him to tell me the nature of the Cafe any farther, than that this unhappy Perfon was in a worfe Condition than 'twas poflible for him to Reprefentj being by a cruel Law that was lately made, purely to gratifie the Revenge of one of the Judges., that is Since Dead, to be carry’d diredtly to a moft loathfome and miferable Prifon, and there to continue during Life.
By that time thefe mercyleSs Ruffians had drag’d the poor Man to the end of the Alley., the Paflage was? open, and the Coach drove into a Spacious Court, fi-tuated upon the Banks of the fineft River I ever beheld. When we came into the Chambers, I think I never faw things more Uniform and Convenient, nor a Prolpedl fo exceeding Beautiful and Delightful. We had hardly taken the Luggage out of the Coach, but feveral Gentlemen of the Houfe came to' vifit my Friend, and bid him welcome to Town. A-mong the relf, one, that I found be had a particular intimacy with, took him afide, I fuppofe, to enquire who I was; what he faid to him I don’t know,. but as foon as he left him he came up to me, and told me his Chambers were Contiguous; and that he was confident Mr. —which was the firft time I had heard his Name, would not take it amiSs, if I would do him the Favour to ftep in now and then and drink a.Difh of Tea with him. As he was going away, my Friend call’d to him, and told him if he was not pre-engag’d, he would be glad to eat a Chop of .Mutton with him, at the Popes-Head Tavern^ in the Evening.



4®
New
We
with us, and with all the franknefs and good humour Imaginable, told us 5 he had put off all Bufinels for the Nightj and that we might difpofe of him as we thought fit. It was now about Seven, which according to the Cuftom of the Stultitiam.^ was at leaff: two hours too fbon to Sup 5 and what mult be done , to fill up that Interval, was the next (T-ieftion. Several expedients were propofed: at lalti it was concluded to go to the Gr&cian Coffee-hoitfe,^ and read the News, and divert our felves among the Foliticiam.
When we came there, we found the Houfe crowded with variety of People, and fuch a confufed Noile^ and Jar among ’em, that a Man could hardly hear hirnfelf Speak. Some were talking for and againft Religion. Some were ftating Cafes of Conlcience j others propofing Law Queftions, and attempting to reconcile ContradiDions. Some were Bartering and Stock-jobbing. Some were Wrangling, Scolding and calling Names, and others Lying, Cajoling and Flat^ tering ; fo that in my whole Life I never faw fuch a Colledion of Peribnsfb intricately jumbl’d and mix’d together.
After we had flood a little while by the Fire, my Friend twitch’d me by the Sleeve ^ 6owe,fays h.e.^1 believe you have had your Jill of tins fort of Society^ follow me and well go try if we can mend our felves in the other RootU'.^ there perhaps we may find a place to fit down, and fome Company that are a little more entertaining. The Room I confels was much better, and the quieter of the two i and the Company well dreft, and look’d ^ Ipmething more like Gentlemen *, but for the ConVer-fation, I think there was no great odds in it. Some of thefe were for the High, fome for the Low-Churchy and fome for neither ^ fome were for Feace.^ and fome tvere for IKar, and propos’d feveral ridiculous Schemes for promoting the one, and carrying on the other.
Says
r'
iriand of fools

Say^ a bluftring noifie Spark, they cdfd in^ Lord 5 if that canting Blockhead.^ the DoCcor, had been dead^ and damd.d.^ before he had preacPd his cur fed Sermon, the bufnefs had been all over, and we had had none of thefe parrels and Clamours about Peace and War, nor been under the Apprehenfons of the lofs of our Liberties and Properties, and having the Settlement altered, and a Pretender impos'd upon us. Says another, that us’d to keep his Lordfbip’s Back-hand upon thefe Occafi-ons^ .My Lord, you are perfeBly in the Right:, if the Old Miniftry had not been Supplanted, and all their fne RrojeSts circumvented and defeated by a few Upftart Politicians, we had had none of this Noije and CombuJlioH about Hereditary Right. We had not had the Old .Mufy worn-out DoBrines of Paflive-Obedience, and Kon-Refiftance, new Vamped, and bawl'd about againi The Names of Whig and Tory had been ahnojl lojl, and quite forgot, and all our Scandalous DiJHnBions bad been huried in perpetual Oblivion : but my Lord, that timer's pajl, and we have fip^d an opportunity of making our felves thegreateft and the happiejl People in theUniverfe. Here a worthy Old Gentleman they call’d Serjeant Trudge, a Perfbn of Loyal Principles and good Learning, but of an ill Elocution, role from his Chair, and with
fome Heat told ’em 1
Quarrels
and A pprehenfions, were all groundlels, and only trump’d up by a relllels dilcontented PaBion, to a-mule and fright the Nation. Indeed, fays he, my Lord, I verily believe, if the fine Projects of your Party had not been Defeated, and they had had the Adminiftrarion of the Publick Affairs a year or two longer^ all that you and your Counfellors are pleas’d to fay, might have come to pafs 5 with this farther Addition, that if they had went on but a very fhort time, we had been cur’d of all our Apprehenfions, and had had neither Religion, Property, Law, Government, Order or DiJHnBion, to have been eoncern’d
G'	for.
4^	di Voyage to
^or, but been involv’d in a State of Aharcii'y and Con-' fufion, from whence your Old Mimjlry could hardly have deliver’d us. Depend upon it, (Sir, a perpetual Li* iiator.^ which you ft niggl’d fb hard for, and had elfe-6fed too, if you had not been circumvented by a few Upjlart Politicians, as you are plealed to ftile ’em, bad not prevented it: At leaft the War had been never the nearer an End. Nor, by all the ProIpeDs and Rules of Rea Ion, that I am Mafter of, had the Greatnels and Happinels of the People been in any better forward-nefs, than they are at this prefent.
Let him alone Dick, fays the Lord, the Old Gentleman is troubl’d with a Vertigo ^ he has been dreaming of the Pretender laft Night, and that has turn’d his Head. No, Jays the Serjeant, ’tis your Lordihip, and the reft of your Party that dream of the Pretender, and make uSe of him upon all Occafions, to cover your other Deligns. You carry him about with you, as the Turks do Mahomet’s Bones for a Charm 5 I don’t hear of any, but thole that make it their bufinels to difturb the Government, and create Tumults and Livijmis, that trouble their Heads either with the Pretender, or the alteration of the Settlement. You are the People that create the JealouJies, and raife the Outcries your felves; and if ever the Settlement be alter’d, and the Pretender be brought in, ’tis you muft do it: fori don’t believe any body elfe will attempt it, or intends it-
My Lord, I muft be plain with you, there have been within thele few Years So many wicked	openly
avow’d, and in the moft folemn and deliberate manner Aflerted and Maintain’d, that the Stultitians are become the Jeft and Ridicule of all the European Worldand pray, my Lord, give your felf a little time to think, who has been the occalion of this. I appeal to your Lordihip, are they the Whigs or the Tories > Who were they that openly, at the Tryal of
that
Ifland
r-
43
that canting Blockhead the Do&or.^ as you call him. Arraign’d and Condemn’d the Title of the prefent Prince, and had abftraded it from all manner of Hereditary Right ? Who were they that affirm’d that the Regal Dignity was Solely grounded upon a Revolution Fowidation.^ and that there was no Title but vvhat was deriv’d diredlly from thence ? Have not new Modiels of Government been propos’d, and frequent attempts made to begin our Conftitution, He novo ? And are there not a Set of Hirelings,^ and Projligate Seriblers.^ that difpute the Prince's Prerogative of making Peace and ICar j a Prerogative as old as Monarchy it felf, and has never been Controverted, but in times of Revolution an^ Rebellion j and do not the fame vile Wretches continue even to this very Day, to tell the People in their Scandalous Papers and Pamphlets, that no Prince has any farther Title to
I	r
Condefc
Gift
lain, at your Elbow, to tell me, who they are that publickly promote and abet thefe Principles^ and have lately made all this Struggle and Conteft to obftruit the moft honourable and advantageous Peace that e-ver was offer’d to the Stiiltitians a Peace, that in all Probabilty will reftore our IJland to its former Wealth and Grandure, make our Glory and Happinefs al-moft as large as we can wilh, and as laft'ing as the World.
The two Gentlemen who knew the Company, and the natural confequences of fuch a fevere Reprimand, thought beft to be gone before the Storm broke out 5 and accordingly gave me the fign, and fb we left ’em to wrangle it out by themfelves, and went to Supper.
Whilft Supper was getting ready, my Friend entertain’d me with feveral diverting Paflages relating to the Policy and Government of the Stultitians and
G 2	withall
N
^4	New Voyage to
wiLhali asFd me how I lik’d their Coffeerhotije Gonver-^
fation.> VU warrant you.^ fays he, there^s rare work a-mong ^em by this time j before 7iow his Lordjhip foams at the Monthand has caWd the Old Gentleman a hun^ dred Jacobites and Popilh Rafcals ^ and Dick and he^ and the two or three other Toting Rakes they have de-baiicPd and draw7i into their Party, have talPd as much Treajon and Blafphemy as would poyfon and undoe a whole Nation,
I could not very well tell what anfwer to make him, being unwilling to be too forward in my Obfer-vations •, which I take to be a very great jdefed: in the ConduQ of fome Strangers, who take upon *em at firft light to penfure Perfbns and Things and fo I only told him. That I look’d upon this to be the liidden e^lFeDs of Parties and Paflion, and that I did not queliion, but the Stnltitians were too wile a Nation to fuffer any of their People of what degree or quality foever, tp talk Treafon or Blalphemy with Impunity.
Says the other Gentleman, I find your Friend is unwilling to cenfure our Follies as they defer ye, and indeed we ought to think our felves oblig’d to him for his Candour. When he comes to be better acquainted with us, he’ll find thefe extravagancies are not the bare effeDs of Parties and Paflion, but the produd of old Hereditary Grudges, occafion’d by the natural Averlion the two Fadtions have one for ano-fher, and their cpnftant Pradice in all places where they meet: SIr.^ if you’ll give me leave. I’ll trouble you with an AhJlraU of their relpeSfive Characters, which though I confefs they are hardly worth it, yet they may be of fome ule to you in your PalTage through the reft of the Town.
He that they call My Lord, is a turbulent hotheaded Spark that affeas to be at the Head of the f0loyi T. who though they generally look upon him
.<	.....	^	.	...	...	j	.	-.
1
laand
45
to be a Peribn of very little Sence and no Solidity, yet they often make ufe of him in dangerous Cafes, and put him upon Motions that the more Wary and Confiderate of 'em don’t think proper to appear i.n. Dick.^ as they call him, has much better Sence, and wants for no Refblution to back it j but then he’s fb much a Bigot, and fo heated with a miftaken Zeal, that he commonly over-runs his Game, and mines all the Caufes he’s concern’d in. i The Serjeant’s a Gentleman of folid Judgment and great Integrity, but a little too hafty and paflionate in Converfation. He in the Black Wigg, that late next him, is one of our City Senators.^ that commonly votes well, but can
give no other reafbn for it than that Sir John--------
J/fr.------ and the Collonel were of the fame Opini-
on. The two they call’d Dojors^ are two of the Ringleaders of the newSed of Free Thinkers.^ and have drawn after them half the young Fellows about the Town. He in the Gown is one of our Latitndinarian Farfons.^ and a fort of a Spiritual Stoch Jobber. He that fate next to him, is a young Student that’s lately come from the Univerfty, and has a mighty Inclination to be thought an Atheift ^ but is fb unfortunate to be fb perfectly a Blockhead,^ that no body takes any notice of him. The old Sparks that fate finoaking and grumbling at the other Table by themfelves, are a fet of Ufurers and old Rich Attorneys^ that came only to read the News and make Obfervations y or
of h^ing
Coffe
This, my Lord, is the Petaile of what I colleHed the firft Night I came to this great Town 5 where every Day I continue I find will produce a world of Ocr currences, which I am fenfible would come to your Pordfhip by any other hand with greater Advantages than I can pretend: however, fince you are pleas’d to honour me with their acceptance, I fhall continue to "	tranfinit
4^
A Nen> Voyage to
tranfinit them in the bell: manner I can, and thereby lignifie the Ambition I have of being,
Pated from the MetropoUs of the Ifle of Foolsj January 27. 1712,
My Lord. See
E T T E R
V.
.My Lord,
TH E next Day the two Gentlenaen were fb kind
to promile me to bear me company to the Court End of the Town, whither we let out about Ten in the Morning. We took Water at a Pair of Stairs at the Foot of the Chamber, from whence we orderM the Watermen to carry us to the Old Palace, which is diftant about half a League. In this Ihort Paflage, Botwithftanding the Weather was very cold, and few Perfons of falhion go by Water, we found the River almoft cover’d with Boats of different makes and ■fizes, which, as my Companions inform’d me, might be feen almoft every Day in the Year except Sundays: when there’s only a limited number permitted for the conveniency of tranfporting Paftengers.
My Lord, upon this tranlient view ’tis impollible I fhould give your Lordihip any tolerable Account of this famous River. The Gentlemen told me, That it ftretcheth it felf Wefiward into the very Heart of the Country, and that moft of the Provifion and o-ther Neceliaries for this great and populous City were convey’d to it that way ^ adding withall. That if by any Invafion or Inliirredion, or by any other Accident, the Paflage fliould be intercepted but for twenty Pay?, the ?eople muft be (lary’d j gpd Seern’4
very
island
47
^elry much to condemn the Stiiltitian Policy.^ that a better Provihon was not made to ftcure ’em againft the polFibility of a Surprize of that nature.
Whilft they were delcribing to me the Extent, Length, Depth, and the appendant Advantages 5 e-fpecially the prodigious Wealth it brought yearly to the Prince, there pafs’d by us a cover’d Boat with lix Oars, which the Watermen told us, was the Metropolitans Boat: and as they fuppos’d, was carrying him to the Coimfel Chamber.
Here I was fb unlucky to ask a Queftion or two, which I found neither of the Gentlemen wiere at firft willing to anfwer j at length fays one of them : Our prefent Metropolitan is very little known.^ tmlefs it be to a SeleD Party, to whom he owes his Advancement^ and is fo entirely devoted., that he allows very few others to have any fare either of Ms Favours or Converfation. His Endowments, Learning, and other Spiritual J^alifications will, without doubt, render him remarkable in the next Generations ; and as for the prefent, I don^t hear he is much concern d about it. As you make your way through the Town yod.U be fure to hear more or lefs of his Chara&er^ and from thence will be able to guefs at him better than ’tis proper for its to direct. Sir, fays one of the Watermen that overheard us ^ I fiytd my Majlers are afraid or afamA to teU you any thing of our great Metropolitan 5 but if they won^t be angry, I can tell you in a- few words what he is. In fort, he is one of thofe they call Low-Church-men, and thefrf Metropolitan we ever had of that fort, but one ^ and he was purely a Revolution One, 07td did hardly believe in God: at leaf, he did not believe in him as his Predecejfors did before him. This put us all into a fit of Laughter, which continu’d till we arriv’d at the Place we intended.
From thence we went to a great Hall, where the fudges fit to try Caufes, and the Lawyers refbrt in
Term'time to mangle and deftroy the Law: The
Place
s

48
Kler»>
Place was very Spacious and Magnificent, and tW
jipt fo uniform as Some of our Modern Buildings; yet in all relpecfs extreamly well adapted to the Ufes that are now made of it. Here we met with little
worthy obfervation} except it were great numbers of Colours and Standards that the Stukitiam had lately taken from the Gauls in feveral memorable Battles.;
One of the Gentlemen Ihew’d me them with a great deal of plealiire; but withall told me, That never Tro-
phies tpere purchased with fo much hazard, and at the ex-
Ifi
If / fxould teU you what IIardf

it, what immenfe ifiiferably they he
imposed- upon; yoiid he furpriz'd that this little If and fmild be fiU able to hold the Ballance of Power among th6 European Princes^ and to make fo confderable a Figure
It. There is no Nation but the
efent.
fquandcr
d fifty Millions., and five hundred thoufand of the Lives
f the bravef of th
gefions 1 and yet this we have done, and you I
fi
What our Peace may produce is locPd
Succefs of
f Futurity, and feems chiefiy
When we had walk’d two or three turns here, we
went up a large pair of Stairs, tvhich led us to an antiquated Chamber *, which is generally crowded with
Perfons of ail Ranks and Degrees during the fitting of the Senate, more efpecially with Priefts and Projectors. After we had view'd the Throne and the two
Houfes of Parliament, they conducted me to an Ad-
jacent Jbby of great Antiquity 5 and tho' at firfl: fight the Workmanfhip did not feem fb Sumptuous as fome of our Foreign Churches: yet when you came within it, to look Separately upon the Height, Strength and Beauty of the Pillars, the Loftinefs of the Roof and
thg

Ifland
49
the Eta^fnefs and Regularity of the whole Fabrick^ methoughts it carryM a Natural Greatnefs and Mag-iiificence without any Pomp or artificial Advantages, and was in the main olie of the heft and trueft Pieces of Architecture I had ever feen. Here the Kings and Queens of the Ijle^ and the Perfons of the firfi: Quality are iifually Interr’d ^ whole Tonibs and .Monmiients are exceedingly fine and beautiful, and fbme of them fb curioufly and naturally adorn'd and engrav’d, that I believe they are hardly to be exceed-ed in any part of the World.
From hence we went through a private Gardeii td the Ruines of the Royal Palace I have already intimated to you in a fontler Leuer, where we only made a little flop to view a Statue, that was eredied formerly in honour to that unfortunate King, the Father of the prefent Prince; which we found in a very fcandalous negle£led Condition, and alinoft cover’d with Dirt and Rubbidge. The Gentlemen would have haften'd me away without giving me time td make any Remarks, or asking any^' Queftiods, but one of them apprehending, that in all probability,
I would defire to know the Caufe why this excellent Statue was no better taken care of, prevented me, by telling me; That this unfortunate King had highly difbblig'd the Stultitians by feveral Mifinanage*^ ments in his Government •, he had told me fome of the Particulars, but the other interpos’d i Says he^ The Hiftory of this Prince is doubtlefs fufficiently known in all Coun treys that have ever read or heard any thing of the IJland of Fools, We lUay varnilh o-ver his Misfortunes, and Shade them with falfe Colours ; but without doubt whenever they cornO to be candidly arid fairly ftated and reprefented, they will make as melancholy a Story in the Stultitian Annals,
next to the barbarous and unparallePd Murder of his
' H	Father^
50	A New Voyage to
Father, as any that can be found among ’em fince the firft beginning of their Monarchy.
By this time twas thought proper to go to fbme Coffee-Hoiife and drink a Pilh of Chocolate^ and take a little refpit for a quarter of an Hour ^ which happen’d to be that which they call the Touvg Mans j a C(ffee-Hovfe generally frequented by the Officers of the Army, which the Lady Governefs by her winning Airs and artful Behaviour has fo effectually methodiz’d, that Ihe commands Tom, Harry., JNed., Will, Joe, Boh, Phil, and the reft of her Collonels and Field Officers at difcretion : who look upon it as a diftinguiffiing mark of her efteem, as often as fhe’s pleasM to condelcend to be fo familiar with ’em, to call ’em by thofe pretty little endearing Nick-Names.
One of my Companions had the honour of being known to her Ladyffiip, who ftie was pleas’d to favour with the Title of her Connfellourand as a further Teftimony of the lingular regard fhe had for him, was fo kind to lit down with us, and tell us the News which fhe that Moment receiv’d from a General of her Acquaintance on the other jide, and might be depended upon for the trueft and beft in the lOand.
My Lord, the Room was fo crowded, and the Company fo mix’d, that no Man could form any 7 *	: Some had the Afpedf of Gentlemen of
Birth and Education, and behav’d themfelves with a great deal of Modefty and good Manners. Others had the Looks and Carriage of Btdlies and Scoim-drels, and were fo perfeflly Brutifh and Ignorant, and what was worfe, Swore and Blafphem’d fo in-
that a fober Perfon cannot be among ’em without imagining the Army, where Men are generally lu'ppos:d to have the opportunity of converling
with
the island of Fools.
51
with Gentlemen of the moft refin’d Parts and bright-eft (Tialifications, to be a Nurfery of Lewdnefs and Debauchery, and the very Sink of all that’s Vile and Scandalous.
Your Lordihip, who has made fo considerable a Figure in the Army, knows very well how careful we are at Venice in the choice of our Officers, and indeed in all the Civiliz’d Parts of the World; the Army is efteem’d as the only Academy for the lEdu-cation of their Young Noblemen and Gentlemen of the firft Rank: How the Stiilthians come to be fb miferably defective in this particular they alcribe to feveral Caules, but chiefly to the CovetouSneSs of Some of their Generals j who as my Companion told me, us’d formerly to make a Trade of the War, and to fell the Gommiflions to the higheft Bidder, without any regard either to the Character or Qualifications of the Purchafer, which has introduc^’d among ’em abundance of lewd and illiterate Scoundrels.^ and that hath drawn Reflections and Cenfiires upon the whole Body. One part of the Room was full of thefe fort of Fellows j which, one of the Gentlemen afterwards inform’d me, were moft of ’em broken Tradeflnen, Ldckeys, Pimps, Setters, Bayliffs, or the Relations and Depend:^nts of Whores and Bawds, and theOut-cafls of fiofiie Families that could be dispos’d of by no other method : But what I prefume would have given your Lorddiip an equal mixture of Wonder and Contempt, would have been to have heard thefe Animals talk Politicks, and infolently cenliire and revile the Government, damn the Miniftry, curfe the Peace and Peace-makers, and all their Adherents : as I my felf heard one of ’em, in the Face of the whole Company.	_	_	'
I ftiall not now detain your Lordihip with any Re-fleffions upon this part of the Stnltitian Policy ; tho’ I cannot forbear obferving how dangerous as well as
H 2	ridiculous

52	^ Nevp Voyage to
ridiculous it is for any Government to entrufi: any (hare of its Safetj^ and Prefervation in the Cuftody pf Perfons of fiich lewd and fcandalous Principles: at leaft, to fiiffer itfelf with Impunity to be revil’d aiid vilify’d by thofe that eat its Bread, and have their foie and ultimate Dependance upon it.
At the Table adjoyning to us were fix or feven j who from the Diftance and Refpedt which the reft pay’d ’em, I believe might be Generals or Officers of a Superiour Rank: In the midft of thefe fate one they call’d DoSor^ a Man famous among the Stulti-tians\for feveral little Party Pamphlets he had publilh’d j particularly two relating to Peace and War. This DoBor^ it feems, had writ on both iides, and made himSelf remarkable for his Trimming and tacking a-bout with every Turn and Change of the State. The Company feem’d to hear him with a particular regard and diftin£):ion j and indeed, to fpeak the truth of him, I hardly ever obferv’d any body dictate with a more grave and mafterly Affiirance.
The Argument then before ’em was upon what Grounds and Pretentions Princes ought to declare War and enter intp Confederacies ^ which, as he very -well pbferv’d, was chiefly the breach of the iSallance of Potper: Adding further, That if the breach of the Ballance of Power not a fnfficient ground for a War^ then the Stultitians had no reafon to begin theijt Bloody War with the Gauls j but were purely tricPd into it by thofe who had ProfpeBs of enriching themfelves by it; which in truth, my Lord, I take tp be their very cafe.
A Collonel that fate oppoflte tp him, enter’d the Lift, and undertook to oppofe him, and manag’d the Argument with fo much dexterity and ftrength of Reafon, that the DoDor was often forc’d to fhift his Grounif and to have recourfe to little	-A.rts
and Tricks, which all ftiir and candid Difputants reje^
wiph Contempt,	' ........ My
Istand
53
i
My Lord, In this wrangling between ’em, for I can call it nothing elfe, there happen’d to drop out feveral material Occurrences, which I had never before met with; which I fhall take the freedom to lay before your Lordfiip, when I have inform’d my lelf more fully of the Motives that prevailed with the Stultitiand^ to declare with the Gauls: which by ail I have yet learnt, feem to be exceeding frivolous
and ill grounded.
When we were going out of the Door, the .Major that travei’d with us from the accoftedus^ and nothing could prevail v/ith him, but we mull dine together. At Dinner he diverted us with a very merry Delcription of the Lady Governefs of the Cqfee-houfe^ and entertain’d us with the Chara(3:ers of leveral of her Gueftsj particular with that of the Do&or^ and his Antagonift: both which, I believe, might not be altogether unworthy your Lordfiip's Notice 5 if they would not fill up too much of my Letter., which I am apprehenfive has already tret paired too long upon your Leafure, and fo lliall be referr’d to another time. After Dinner he pull’d out of his Pocket a Papery whi^h, for the lake of the particular Humour and Delign of it, I took the pains to Copy, and have ventur’d to lend it to youj which I beg your Lordjbip to Excule, and to place to the Account of the reft of my Impertinences.

8 BM-
/
54
L4 NetP Voyage to
SEMPER IIDEM:
OR, THE
w
TT
O
i >
NEW
LI
ANY
Wortem animum prdtjiant rebus quas turpiter
audent.
Jiiv. Sat. 6.
\
Reat Jove! look down on us poor WHIGS, With Vigour fill our Hearts j That we in thye unfiable Times,
May wifely aS our Parts !
The Hands of wicked Tories grow More heavy ev\y day j
Qur Trimming Friends their Collars Jllp.,
4ni all we do^ betray .
\
Oh
the Ifland of Fools*
\
55
Ob Jove! thou htovIJl'we feldomgive Thy Godhead any trouble;
We never pray but with Dejign^
Or when aff,iff;ed double.
Then hear us now.^ and with fome PLOT
Infpire us out of Hand 5
That we this Peace may circumvent.^
And High* Church Pow^r withjiand.
All the fine Proje£fs we had laii^ Are utterly defeated;
And what is worje., we muji refund The Treafiire we have cheated.
Nay fome there be fo wicked grown^ They Jlick not to declare 5 That we have been the Injlruments Of carrying on the War :
War
5/
-'CJ-	7
J!)ould
Oh who can bear that Thought!
Hear us^ great Jove ^ oh ! hear us now I
The Pow’r to us rejlore :
And we declare both One and All^
WeIl trouble You no more, ,
s
Infatuate or Amufe the Dutch Incline them to believe.
That
5^
A New Voyage t&
That we have JHU both Wealth and Friends Our Stations to retrieve.
f
Fill the Imperial Court with lIope^ That they may yet regain.^
How vain fo ere be their Pretence^
The Monarchy of Spain.
*
Raife all d.re Europe Doubts and P New JealoiiJies foment 5 Confound at Utrecht all they do 5 Promote frejl) Difcontent.
^TiU Lewis, ( hear us mighty Jove \) ProvoPd by our delay;
Send for his Minifters all home. And all Phas faid, unfay.
Or if that cannot well be done ; Then raife a Holy War.
That we to fave our felves may take With either fide our Share.
*	% t


* Y '•
f /
/
Rather than be the Tories Slaves, what ist we would not do ?
Joyn either with the Pope or Turk, Or any Game perjue.

Jove !, as matters fia7td thou knowf. me is very fort: therefore pray thee quickly fend
Dijlra&ion
Divide
the Ifland of Fools,
57
e Minifters of Si heir Coiinfels blaji Senate to JitfpeB ill ferPd at Ujl.
Give to the Priefts a lying Tongue, Mijlaken Zeal and Pride ^
That they may preach the People damn'd^ Who are not on our Side.
And grant us once again the MOBB j For now the time draws on^
When by their Help we may prevail.^ And then our Work is done.
Hear us j ob ! hear us but this Time ! And if we gain our Ends j WeIl make thy Altars dayly Smoke And be thy faithful Friends.
\
/
But if we fail, and lofe the Game, And by the Tories fall WeIl eitherfeek another GOD, Or have no GOD at All.
My two Companions, who were both Tories ^ and to a high degree averfe to Phanaticifm, and all kind of Antimonarchical Principles, were extreamly pleas’d with it. Says one of them. Though I am no Friend to Libels and Scandalous Pamphlets, which I look upon to be one of our greateft Follies 5 yet fb long as the Prefs is allow’d that extravagant Latitude it now has, and fiich multitudes of pernicious Papers
I
are
S8
A New Voyage to
)
\
are hourly fcatter’d among the People j I think it highly requilite, to prevent the ill confequences that naturally follow, that now and then a Paper of this kind fhould be thrown in among the reft: Sir, Pa^i he^ This Paper gives a few general Items of the Practices of a Stubborn, Turbulent Party^ which greedily thirft after an abfolute Power, to enflave the reft of their Fellow Subjects. Their Stratagems, Plots and Contrivances, to circumvent the Peace, without which they are intirely convinc’d, that the yiand muft, be involv'd in perpetual Debts, and o-ther dangerous Circumftances, beyond the poffibility of a Recovery, are hardly to be believ’d, nor never to be paralleled. If it was worth your hearing, I could produce fuch a Catalogue of them, that muft at once engage both your Wonder and S^fow ; but this fhall be none of my bufinefs at prelent, you’ll hear of ’em faft enough in your Progrefs through the Town. The Major has been fb kind to favour us with one of his Papers ; and if I fhould not be trou-blefbme, Fd fhew you one of Mine. ’Tis call’d an Elegy upon the Death of the moji Renown d GeneralWzT ^
which after he had read, he gave me the liberty to
Tranfcribe,
AN
/
the island of Fools.
S9

A N
-i
UPON THE
D
1
TJ
O
Of the moft Renown’d
GENERAL WAR
9
By a Disbanded Officer.

That have often fung of Feats of Arms,
Of dreadful Sieges, and of ftout Alarms j Of taking cover’d Ways, and forcing Trenches, Mix'd with Complaints of poor forlaken Wenches 5 Mujl now in doleful Dirge prepare to tell,
flb«;GENEKAL WAR by fad Difajler feV.
%
Long mcontrouVd he ranged the Bloody Field, Ravag'd large Countries, made lirong Cities yield 5

I 2
Pillag’d
\
€o
New
Pillag’d and Plunder’d to enhannce his Store., And wallow'd in vajt Floods of Human Gore Had other glorious Mifchiefs too in hand„ Had Fate not wrejled frotn him the CommarK Oh cruel Fate ! to rob him of the Spoile, When he fo near hadfnijl)A all his Toyle ; But jince hd.s dead, As pity he fiould lie., And rot, and fiinh,, without an Elegy.
Where went his Soul, let thofe that pleafe ri Who dive for Secrets in the Future State. My Mule fiall no unknown Meanders tread,
I JervA him Living, and VU fng him Dead j And thc) no Mufe his Praifes can fet forth., Mine fiall attempt fome Sketches oj Ms wort\
/
What Countrey bred him cannot well be known. Since all his Birth and Parentage difown.
Some Jay indeed..y -tbat he was frjl begot..
In a State Bpg, and. gender d in a Plot *,
Some, that a Tyrant got him in his Luji,
And that he was by Revolutions nurs'd And fome with greater Strength of Truth declare, That he was born Rebellion’s Son aytd Heir. Others report he was of Antient Race,
But by degrees grew harden d and pajl Grace j And others., that fame crafty Politician,
Lay with his Mother in a foul Condition.
^Tis certain this, he mpjl be near allfd.
Both to Ambition, Intereff, and Pride. Ambition was the Darling of his Soul, iPid all his A&s and i7tmo(i Thoughts controul. Pride was his early Vice, the thoughts o/Rule, Alade hhn fubmit to be a Parties Tool;
But Intereff, fatal Intereft, layA the Snare,
That 4tew him in. and catclfd him unaware.
Oh
the Ifland of Fools.
Oh who can view the wonders be has done,.
What Countries conquer d,^ and what Battles won But mujl have fome regret now he is gone.
if common grief.
6i
'll not then Juch firive to mourn
but Jmall relief
He gave us all lac d Coats and Money Store, aind never fcrupVd evry man his Whore 5 Alas poor Creatures, what will you do now.
Half-pay will quickly jlarve.^ both us and you, r We miijl no more on cojlly Dainties dine.
And feajl our Pallates with the noblefl Wine:
Neat Port muji ferve, and after that Jhall fail.
We mufl take up with trufly Mild and Stale.
To keep from Limbo we muJl all Retrench,
And only now and then fneak to a Wench.
Thefe are the Profpeds that his Death hath brought. But for himfelf he's hardly worth a Thought.
A poor voracious Wretch, who to be great.
Eld all the Comforts of his life defeat;
Betray’d and vex'd the State, diJlurPd the Laws, And grew Dead-drunk with Popular Applaufe.
Thd Years and Sealbns varfd his Delight,
Nothing could quench his raging Appetite :
Still as his Wealth IncreasM, he fill grew poor.
And Jlill the Wolf would howle within for more.
/ \
But fnce he^s dead, een let him rejl in Peace,
If Wars and Tumults Jlmtld again encreafe-,
We'U Jlrive to find another in his Stead,
Will neither fink our Pay, nor flop the Soldiers Bread. But leajl too far I firetch his Elegy, f>et him that loves, or hates, him more than 1,
pr, fink bis Name, or raife his Name more High,
^3	A New Voyage to^ 8cc.
TU only add thefe Maxims to the Jaftice of all the Vertues is the befi 5 Courage without it but a common pejl.
Tray tors and Knaves are oft wi& Courage
Which {hews how ill that Virtue may be placd.
Titles and Honours may be Bought and Sold,
And Men may barter Confciences for Gold :
Wealth and Applaufe to Villains may be given.^
And Fools from thence perhaps may cenfure Heaven 5 Footmen and Rafcals of a mean Degree,
May by feme eajie Prince intruded be ^
Till his immortal Rogueries Succeed,
Betrays him frjl, then glories in the Deed.
But none of thefe can make ns JuJl or Brave,
Juftice from Realbn, and from Heavn we have 5 That gives the noblejl TinBure to our Blood,
Dwells in the Soul^ and makes us Great and Good,
I
My Lord, The reft of the Occurrences of the Day will come to your Lord(hip by my next j till then I humbly take leave,
1	'5>
And am your LordJhipV
moJI obedient, See.

N*
TR
I
A) 3 2 S
/
Ifl5
THE E K T>
\


4

,0-,


,rc»A
i

?l£
f?a

■t
f *J
;■
t
3P**:7l' f il
f,r.i
j*j\
'lI

c;
c>

f

-2


li
' ».*

b V
“A"

qei S0O1.AJ0S JO|OQ |i0suni/\j Aq sjo|oq
zvz
ro‘2
Z9T

860
SZ'O
9t^‘62-	2Z-2I-	62T8	1-O‘Oe	ZZ08	6l7'6t7-	08’89*	■’86’^	8r6l--	6l7‘0	6L0	8Z0	090	WO-	100
ZLZ2-	8809	9r£	0029	l.6'88-	9081.	88'9l.	9l7'l72-	8602	820-	1-80-	900-	1790	8L0-	9L0-
Z809	6Z29	W28	96817	I6>9	Z862	96'2Z	9l7'2Z	\rVlZ	l7l7-8	628	6L91-	98'82	2988	82-617
OC	62	82	Z2	92	92	PZ	82	22	1-2	02	61.	(a) 81.	11	(1^)91
1


ooz
009
oos
is
Ur»e4e) «rMi *»cp ,.
gt»	w
tO	|0
o
0/-1 I I I I I I I I 6| I I I I I I I I 81 I I I I I I I I Z| I I I I I I I I 9| I I I I I I I I 9| I I I I I I I I ^1 I I I I I I I |8| I I I I I I I |3| I I I I I I I I /-1 I > > I I I I iS^I SJiQ\Qm\\UQO
\0
l.9‘0
98-0
220
8L0
600
roo
A;!SU0Q
j0AJ0sqo 00J60P z ‘lUBUiLuniii 09Q
6L0	820	817-0	1.20	820	Zll	1.8-81-	ZOOlT-	0968	98-0-	6VPZ-	88 22	6222-	2Z-81.	ZO-91.
ZO'I.-	61 1-	90-1-	9Z0-	090-	017-0-	89817	18-U.	92178	817-88-	286	0881-	17817-	U.-81.	172-81-
9L29	90’2Z	n-28	178Z8	2026	90-Z6	172 29	2668	1.8-89	280Z	98-98	92-^	196P	817-89	21.-68
91.	n	8t	21.	(V) ll	01.	6	8	z-	9	8	17	8	2	1.

I
ssqoui
/