QOQQOQ QOOQOQQOO QC^Q^OQQOQ
V I '
Love-Letters
Between a certain late
NOBLE MAN
And the famous .
Be.axLW I ISO K
-tS''i-’v. ..	, s. •
■” -I	X	1 itltr-
aOS 0OO0oB©oaQoeooaQ@S'©@® iPrice Oife Shilling
' lA ^	. ’	'	' ’'h	' r i - ;
Love-Lette rs
Between a certain late
NOBLEMAN
And the famous
Mx.WILSON:
DISCOVERING
The true H i s t o r y oS the
Rife and furpristng Grandeur of that celebrated Beau.
4	-
Pro Venere f<cpe., pro Adonide femper,
LON D 0 N:
Printed [oiA*Moore^ ntat StPauTs.
T H E ^
PREFACE.
8"“’	. ff is to he e 'xpeBed., that up-
on the reading the Title of thefe Letters, the Curious vpill not be a little alarm d 5E ^ Piece of Hijiory which has lain fo long in the Dark, and is riow, more hy Chance than any other Means, coming to a fair and open Light, The only Contefl among the politer Part of Mankind will he. Whether the Fa&s are true, and the Letters genuine ^ or only a fWitious Scene of the worji Sort of Gallantry, and the Prodiidl of a mercenary Pen, To obviate the firft ObjeBion, we Jhall only that we have not as yet had one tolle-rahle Difcovery, how the Party who is the SuhjeB of thefe Memoirs, kept up that pro- ,
.. ______ _
The PREFACE.
ftyife Grandeur., in which he Iwd within the Memory of Multitudes fill furviving. The Reader will find^ in the Courfe of the Letters, the fame dark Guejfes and Con-JeBures concerning this Meteor of Mortality, as are now publiJPd from Mouth to Mouth, without the leaf Foundation of Truth, and he has been the fame Myfiery fince Dead, as he was when living. But the Difcovery fnade in the following Papers, fets the Mat^ ter quite upon another Bottom, and gives it all the Probability that an Affair of fo odious and criminal a Ffature can pojjibly have. Had there been more faid, it might have render d the whole ftfpeBed \ and therefore the Editor has been obliged to conneB the broken Parts of the Story by fome add tAonal Remarks, which have come to his Knowledge from feveral Hands, with whom the Parties were very familiar.
As to the fecond Part of the OhjeSion, That it might be a Work of Fancy or Ima~ gination, fuch as are every Pay obtruded Upon the World, under the Notion of true JIiffoA .* He takes the Liberty to ajfure the World, that the Originals were found in the Cabinet of the Deceased, which had pafsdl thro* fome Hands, before the private Drawer, the Lodgment of this Scene of Guilty was difcoverd. How, or by what Means this was done, or from what Hand
they '
The P R B F A G E.
they are made publicI, is a Point too tended and confequential to relate. But we can appeal to a better Tajle for thefe Letters being genuine., efpecially to fuch who have any Tafte of Style^ or Delicacy of Writing. *Th^ are too polite.^ and written with an Air too peculiar not to be difingmjlId from the FroduElions of a feigned Intrigue : The Thing fpeaks itfelf ^ and any one^
, without Preface or Commentary., might eafi>-ly fee by the naked Letters^ that they could not come from any Perfon, but one of Birth and Figure^ and many other Court-Hke Ac^ complijhments.
There is fill behind another ObjeBion to the Publication, which we will not dijfem-hie, and that is, the Scandal of the Vice here defcribed thrd* the Courfe of thefe Papers, The dead Languages are full enough of lufcious PiBures of this Kind, and we dortt find the Moderns fcruple to tranflate them, in order, as we may fuppofe, to raife a greater Abhorrence of a Sin which is not familiar to our Northern CIL mate. It is eafy enough to take away all Offence of this Kind, by applying the Paf fion of thefe Letters to difliriB Sexes, which we defire the Reader to do, and then hell he a better Judge of the Spirit of the Wri~ ter. All the Weeds will then vanijh, or he • ,	turnd
•
The P R E F A C E.
turn d into Flowersy and in- that View let them he feen.
We mujl heg Pardon for not puhlijhing one Letter., which relates to a P erf on now living, of to great an Intereft and Figure in this whole Concerny to he meddled with at prsfent.	-ri
All that can he faid fr, that no Reader of common Senfe fan miflake the Partly and we have m Reafon to help his Con-jeBures., when the Cafe is fo evidenU Another Opportunity may make that Supplement both a necejfary and ufeful Key to the whole Adventurey till wheny farewell,
. A ..	.	if\ "
r
I'.	■	.....
LOVE-
■	^ c '
T
■f
/
»
t > ]
tiet3fciafciaEae»^5Karg3caariif*i>*Ti~>'Ti
iKIgi'll I 1 ULLi. JLU 1 L-gK ■ » ..< I M.1 I » . . . . i. ■ . . ..Jj »i. «« i . .	. ....iL.ilttj
i
LETTER I.
to Mr. Wilson.	^
A Y, Was it a cold In-I fencibility that caufed you I to shun a Challenge, where I to give and receive excefs I of Pleasure, was to have -------------been the only Combat between us; or conscious of your own matchlefs Charms, are you refblv’d with peevish, coy Pride, to be won at the Expence of a thoufand Inquietudes and rest-lefs fond Defires, you Force rne to endure ?
If you are of i TurninSencible to Pleasure, I know Gold has the greatest afcen-dant over you | for all covet it for what it pufchaSes: This Bill may convince
}}	yotd
[ 1 ]
you, I have that in my Power : I can be Fortune to you, and, with many BlessTings, I’ll crown the chiefest Willies of your Heart; only hasten to gratify the eager Impatience of mine, that longs to fold you in thefe Arms, where you may fe-cure me, ever yours.
Greenwich- Park, he helo'tnd Flamstead s LIoufe^ and I fltall fee jouy to Morrow Nine at Nighty dont fail to come.
I	.	.	■
w-
letter
C 5 1
S ^	^ ^ >% •%.%	^	^ A r%
d£l Uti ^ d& Ul3 tS) illi (.& UiE3ti:D tAU uy ii®g 6^ l^
LETTER IL
To--------
YO U might justly have reproach’d my backwardnefs in meeting a ChaL knge, had it been poffible to have diS-cern’d, that either Love or Rage had dictated thofe ambiguous Phrafes, which lay liable to variety of Constructions : I was convinced it came from no mean Hand, and for me to fix it, might be Prefumption ^ but you have done me the Honour to difclofe the Mistery by the foftest and most agreeable way in Nature : For tho’ I’m not a-fraid to meet a brave Man’s Sword, the Indearments of a fine Lady are infinitely preferable. Then how great must be her Power, to inlpire the Souls of others with that dear bewitching Passion, who can her-felf exprefs it with So much Force and Delicacy: After all this, and the many delightful Ideas my fond Imagination has rais’d, how needlefs is the Charge of not failing to be at the Time and Place appointed.
B ^ LETTER
c 4- ]
m fii Wi	M	W* Wi m
^AiS /?iN /^»N /*'N /(iN /«i\ //ii\ /"»\ //^	/aN /aN /ivC\ /WN /*N //»>> /mN
LETTER III.
To Mr, WI L S O K.
I Had not above an hundred Pieces by me when I receiv’d yours, which made me fend, Swift as the Minutes, to the Bank to fetch this, I would have my IVP^ believe, I am never fo delighted, as when I am doing that which may convince him, how very dear he is tq his nown Love : Then come away, the Bath is ready, that I may Wrestle with it,
and pit it, and pat it, and--it ,* and
then for copier Sport, devour it with greedy Kifles; for Venus^ and all the Foeis Wenclies are but dirty Dowdies to thee.
'Put on the. Brustels Head and Indian Atlafs / Jent
LETTER
[ 5 ]
LETTER IV.
To the fame.
My dearefl Dear,
IA S T Night I was in Company with ^ Some of thy Acquaintance; amongst other strange Wonders, it was started how
irou liv’d ; drov/zy N--—fiM, He
thought it was So extraordinary, it would not be amifs, if the Parliament took it into Confideration : That, replied fqueak-
Ifjg j-----j believe Mrs. V—l-—s
will prevent : Several Conjectures were made ; as French Money, the Jew’s Jewels, Mistrestes ; or elfe, a Contract with the Devil, which occafion’d a learned DiL pure, Whether there is fuch a Gentleman, or no ? At last it was agreed, nemine Contradkente^ to make you Drunk, and then try to Sift you, they knowing you intend for Tunhrid^e on Tuefday. At Night the Plot is laid, which I would have you give into; pretend you are giddy before the Rest; I shall fje the activest
[ ^ ]
In this Farce^ and, perhaps, rudely prefs for the Secret: Be wary; How hard will it be to treat you fo different from the fond Sentiments my Heart has for you t who are all, all, the Delight of it.
Dont let US meet, nor he feen together^ 'till this Bu-finefs is over.
LETTER V.
To the fame.
THey are all devilishly puzzled about you ; it is pleafant to fee how the Ideot’s Curiofities are raifed by this Dif-appointment; do you retire to Town as refenting it : In two or three Days I will follow, not being able longer to stay from Thee, the foftest, loveliest Joy, my doting Heart e’er postest: But begone then, and when the dull three Days are over, I’ll fly to my Dearest, in whofe Arms, I shall be recompens’d for fo tedi-ous an Abfence, and there laugh at all their ridiculous Conjectures.
Wednefday nine a Qloch
LETTER
[ 7 ]
iJ.
LETTER VI.
To the o K T).
Mj ho KT>y
After I had parted from your Lord-ship last Night, I was Slop’d and accosted in a very extraordinary manner,* and in fpite of all the Reststance I was able to make, under the Disadvantage of my Female Drefs, was carried off by a Crew of RuiSans, under the Pretence of Debt, by a sham Name and Action, A Fellow who had discover’d my ViSits to you, endeavour’d, first with flattering Means, and then by bullying me with a Pistol at my Breast, to make me reveal what thoSe private Meetings between us meant; but finding I defpis’d all his Threats, in Consideration of what an Injury it might be to my dearest LORD : I, at last, found a Way to work on him, by fair PromiSes of Rewards, So as to get out of him, that a certain GREAT LADY who
knows
[ n
knb^s ctl hef Actions are back'd by a Ai-periour Power, had a Hand in it. When your Lordship permits me the Honour of relating the Particulars more at large, your difcerning Judgment will not only discover the Motives that induc'd her to it, but direct me how to deceive her, as to the Knowledge she already has goty having made her Engine my Creature, who waits my Orders, as 1 do your Lordship's, with great Impatience; that Indulgence, my dear Lord, has, at all Times, been pleafed to extend towards me. Will, I hope, pardon my Dread of lofing it, and condefcend to give me your Con^ mands how to avoid it,
lETTtft
[ S' ]
LETTER VII.
To Mr, W I L s o Ni
IT was oiie.a Clock before 1 receiv'd Yours, being, till then. With the King, or I had flown to you as foon as I had heard the News of my dear Wi/Iys being ill; a thousand dreadful Apprehenfions about your Health made me as restlefs as I am afraid your Diforder did you: Should envious Death take Thee, my dear-eft'Blefling, from me, I am undone: I can't be eafy till I fee you ; therefore let every Body be out of the Way, that I may come with more Freedom, to my only beloved, which will be in half ^an Hour.
C LETTER
[ 10 ]
LETTER Vm.
To Mr, Wilson.
Did I nor strictly charge my dearest Boy, at parting, not to omit one Opportunity of accquainting me with his returning Health, by which alone my Joys can be restored ? fix Posts have past, and yet no Notice taken of its forlorn expecting dying Lover Tell me the Gaufe of this, if thou art able,* but I’m afraid thoucan’st not, or dur’st not do it^ eithcrthy Illnefs is relaps’d with a malicious Bent to make eternal Separation, and thou hast too much TenderneSs to kill me with the Knowledge ofitj or I have been remifs, or overfond, and cloy’d thee ; that thou dost artfully withdraw thyfelf from rhefe loathed Arms ,* or dost thou vilely defcend to the low Subtilties of the inferiour Sex, who, to enhance their Price, play at fast and loofe, infult and idly triumph over the Sot that does more idly Suffer fuch a Drab to gain the afcendant. Forgive me, my dear WUlj^ if I wrong Thee ; lay all
die
C II ]
the Blame on this unruly Pafiion : A Plague confound thofe lying Dogs of Po- ' ets, who to delude and torture all Mankind, would palm it on us as a Heaven
of Pleasure ——Damn’d Spite, -----It’s
Hell to love and doat to Madnefs, as I do on Thee. Anfwer me quickly if thou canst ; fay fomething to meif it be a Lye, let it be a well invented one; and it will pleafe.
Tou fee trn mad hy G---
/ had forgot to hid you inclofe to Her at Tark-Corner; direIl mine for Mrs. Gray.
Ca	LETTER
[ ]
LETTER IX.
Lo the d./ OK D---
My Lord,
A Fter a long, long fruitfeSs Expect-tation of your Command how to direct to you, which your Lordship may remember was not fix’d on, tho’ loften urged it, I have been fo wretched to construct it as a Mark of your declining Favour : as the Tortures of my Soul are inexprefiible under Such bitter Affliction, fo are my Joys as full to find them caufe-lefs; Thofe foft complaining paffionate Expreffions transported me beyond my Strength to bear, and then revived me with your kind Rebukes; what followed rai-fed an Extafy too great: The past Conflicts of my Mind, under the imaginary Difpleafure of my dearest Lord, made me regardlefs of the Diforders of my Body, which fince your Lordship has enjoyn’d stiali be more my Care ; my Fate is whp-iy in your Power, and you have vouchsafed to biefs me above all Men. Command
*
[i3l
mand me to be well and live j but not (for Oh! I cannot) live without you : Recall me from this reSllefs Banishment, or honour me with your loved Prefence here ,• the Beauties of the Place have fuch Enticements, which, with other Reafons, I am inforrh’d, have long detained fome Perfons of Distinct tion on odd Intreagues, perhaps, not un? worthy your Lordship’s Notice.
/ my
Lord,
I-etter
[ 14- ]
LETTER X.
\
To the Lor d-------
My Lord,
EJ Ager to acquaint your Lordship with j my Return to Town, I dispatched a Mefienger that Moment with a Letter, whp failing of the wish’d Opportunity, to deliver it as ufual, I went immediately to the Play, in Hopes to gratify my Impatience by feeing you there; but contrary CO that, had the Mortification to find one Misfortune attended by a still greater ; when as fometime to difguife my Secret Affection, I Survey Beauty with as much Seeming Delight as other Men ,* Curiofity led me to make Enquiry of afinedrefs’d Lady, I had never before observ’d to a-dorn any publick Place; but how was I confounded, and what racking Thoughts postest me, when I understood llie was a new favourite MistreSs of your Lordship, obtain’d, with much Difficulty; So that, my Lord, my misting yoyi last Night, which
then
[ H ]
then only feem'd Chance,’ may proba* bly hereaSter appear to be your Lordship’s Choice : I refer to your own Judgment, which never errs in Matters of far higher Importance than my Happinefs, and who are So well acquainted with all the Pallions that can affect human Nature, that it would be Prefumption to fend you my feeble Difcription, of what I fuffer on this hateful , Difcovery. I only flatter myfelf with one [Hope, attended by a thoufand Doubts, which two or three Lines from your Lordship will confirm or disperse: I long, yet dread to have your Anfwer, which I am certain yotr won’t fail to fend, as .Soon as this comes to your Hands, If you have any Regard for,
Mj Lord,
Tour mofi entirely,
mofl pajfionately devoted Servanfy
W. Wl LS OM.
CTT-;
/
[ ]
^-i	^**-4»i-'^ ^■i. ^^4 ^4 5«4 ^'4 i«5
$t.i ?v;t ki ki M kt^ 1^* ki ki ki ^r;i Jj
i
LETTER XL
To Mr, Wilson.
Did it fret and teafe itfelf feeeaufe I have got a Wench, but done let one Fear perplex it : When I have Thee in my Arms, thou shalt fee how I de-fpife all the Plealures that changeling Sex can give compared to one Touch of thine ; its true, I had her dirty Maidenhead, which I took fome Pains for 5 not fo much to amufe the dull Time in thy tedious Abfence, which no Confideration but your dea# Health, could have made me comply with ; as to stop fome good na-tur'd Reflections I found made on my Indifference that way. But thou alone art every, and all the Delight my greedy Soul covets, which is heigthned to fuch Excefs, that even pains me, to find my dear IT/^y has fuch a Tendernefs for its nown Love ; then hasten to my fond Heart, that leaps and bounds with Impatience to fee Thee, and devour thee with greedy Rifles.
' LETTER
[*7 3
LETTER XII.
To the Lord-----
Mj Lord,
IT is not to be exprefs'd with how much Rapture 1 receiv’d your Lorp(hip*s Commands to attend you, and if it were polTible that could increafe with me, it is even now, when the different Tranfports of my Soul prevent my ready Obedience to them. Can I Support yoUr adored Prefence with the Torture of not feeing you entirely my own. No, my Lord., the Greatnefs of my Pafiion created and in> fpired by you, has difdained to fliare a Pleaflire with that bafe, low, dull, insinuating Sex; let not one of them prefumc to hope the least Thought, in your exalted Mind, or noble Appetites, and contemn the idle medling infipid World ; but I forget myfelf, and rave with the distracting Thought, that any thing in Nature should be able to interpofe between us; pardon, my dearest Lord, when I astume to joyn myfelf with you; remember, it is a Crime you first descended to encourage me
D	in.
t >8 ]
in, and impute it to no other Spirit of itmbition, but that of being infepara-bly,
Tour Lordjhip s
fhofi obedient SlavOy
W. Wilson
LETTER XIII.
To Mr. W I L S O N.
A Re thefe my Willy s Raptures, that i \ instead of hisSelf, fends me only Words ? Why this Disticuky about ai Trifle I defpife ? For all Things are lb, compared to Thee ; she shall be turn’d a-drift, and I will contemn the idle med-ling World, and nothing shall interpole between us ; for thou canst be guilty of no Crime to me, but that of this peevifli Absence, which I fliall chide it for, and beat it, and then eat it up With greedy ' Killes. I have got the Six pretty Horfes,
St faid it liked before it left the Town, and Something it faiSt know of till it comes. Make Haste.
LET TER
[ rp ]
^0Se5S:£}$0$0SE3Sc3e!S
LETTER XIV.
To the Lor p.”——
L O R D,
W' Hen your Lordship past me yesterday in the Mall^ ids probable, you might fee me cake up a Pocket-book, which I found wyh fix and thirty Letters from a very great Man to a Lady, who must have dropc it just then; they, discovering an Am(|)ur of fome Continuance between 'em, and wherein was an Order for fifty Pounds payable to the Bearer, under his Grace’s Hand. I faw it absolutely necestary to return it entire to the Lady, but with. Such Caution, as she can never be fenfible who it is has had the PeruSal of her Paquet. The Spirit of ’em throughout, to me, Seems low and wrangling, but fuppofe 'em writ with infinitely more Force than even this great celebrated Man is Said to be Master of. What must they appear to thoSe who have
D %
[ 20 ]
the Honour to have a frequent Correspondence with yout Lordship.
I took Time to copy four the most remarkable Letters, and only wish they may prove as instrumental to divert your pre-ient Shagreen, as the Secret you were fo well entertain d with Some Time stnce, concerning that noble Peer who lay in.
I flatter my felf it wont he long^ before J have Orders to attend your Lordfhip.
. LETTER^
[ ]
Letter XV.
To Afr. Wilforiy
IS this thy Faith > Is this thy Return to all my foolish lavish Fondnefs ^ It feems I have taught you a Trade, and Harlot-like you intend to be as common and as despicable as thofe abje^ Wretches \We mufl beg Pardon of the Reader for omitting here fome Lines which are in the Original of this Letter^ being too obfcene to be inferted^ May every Difeafe incident to them infed and destroy thee. What, couldst thou find none but that old naufeous Dog to kifs and stobber thee ? Don’t pretend to deny it, for
by—------- I Saw him : Had not a little
Regard to my Self prevented, I had stabb’d thee that Moment.
I fuppoSe you intend to hide your detested Head in Some Hole, to efca^e my Rage *, but my Revenge shall find thee, and punish thy black Ingratitude:
an
an Ingratitude fo vile, that thou de-ferveft to be a terrible Example to all that bafe Frye: Did not I take thee from a wretched neceSEtous Life, perplex’d with petty Duns, and have railed thee to be the Nation’s Wonder ? Have I de-ny’d thee any thing ? but have been fo laviii to make thee (or thou pretendeft) to blush at my Excels of Bounty: But now I will be as boundleSs in my Hatred as I have been profufe in my extravagant
Love. May all *----———torture
thee, as thy Bafenefs does me.
Letter XVI.
To the Lord ---
May all the detestable Curfes your Lordship has been pleafed to pronounce, with ten thoufand more, inflist ------.....-----------------if I
know or can guefs what you mean.
Is
C 25 ]
Is ic to try the Bent of my Mind, under the most calamitous of all Circumstances , your Lordship’s dread Liif-pleafure ? as you have before done the other Way, in raifing me from that abject Fortune to your high Grace, dif-penSing Favours beyond my own afpiring Hopes, or vainest Defires; which when I ceafe most gratefully to acknowledge, as is my Duty, or give just Caufe of Offence, either by Action or Omiffion, may all the Valuable World, nay, whaf is infinitely preferable to all, your Lord-ships felf, continue to hate, defpife, and brand me, for the most villanous of all that black and loathfome Herd yoii have already rank’d me with.
Am I not the Creature of your Framing, to rife, to fall, to live or die, to mould and fashion as you pleafe > And should I dare to repine at, or more bafely endeavour to hide my felf from the Fate you have allotted me ? It is thinking too poorly of the Wretch, your Lord-ship once vouchfafed to honour with your Love and Esteem, which, perhaps, you’ll fee was not wholly mifplaced, when I have an Opportunity to throw mySelf at your Feet; in the mean Time, de\ife as many
Tormrea
in]
tforfures to rack this hated Body, as at prefent my Soul endures, and let both fall a willing Sacrifice to gratify your Pleasures-
/ amy
My ho K
Tour Lordjhip s mofl faithfully mofi entirely demoted SlavCf W. Wl LS OM.
LETTER XVII.
to Mr. Wilson-
SUre thou art falfe for tliefe Eyes faw you fuffer G—to kifs and Slobber you, you have difarm’d my Anger, wou*d you could my Doubts : Let me See you, but come with certain Proofs of thy Faith, that I may not be fatal to Thee and mySelf: Swear never to fee that hated Dog, and Til believe Thee 5 You have a powerful Advocate within, that would
fain
[ I
fain would find Thee true ,* the very Hope, is a Joy, great as ever filSd my Breast; then \vhat must the Certainty be ? Add that to the many Raptures thou alone could’st give, and I will be thy humble Slave for ever; but take Heed or you’H find my Wrath terrible, exceeding even the Malice of Women.
LETTER XVllI.
To theL o R D---
Lord,
W ith longing Expectation of the coming Joy, I was flying to attend your Appointment; when taking my Tour, according to Custom, I observed Some Perfons, well known to your Lordfliip, \\dio took the Pains to dog me; the Particulars of which whimstcal Ad-* venture Til relate when I have the Honour to approach you next in private, in the inean Time your Lordship I hope will not blame my cautious Retreating ; and give me leave to fay, I wait your fresh Order** with the utmost Impatience.
E	LETTER
[id]
LETTER XIX
1 ••
To Mr. Wilson.
My deareft Boy,
THis impertinent Letter I have Sent Thee, was brought me up this Morning ; they told me the Fellow would not give his Name but preSs'd to have it deliveSd as fomething of Confequence to me ,* could I be angry with my darling Rogue, I flioUld chide it from this Neglect that you did not contrive with me or fome other Way to get rid of him; go or fend to him immediately without taking Notice you have heard from me, and be very fmooth with him, till I be able to manage it So as to make the Impudent Rafcal wish he had been ignorant, or at least not fancy in my Affairs ,* after you have been with him come away to me ; for one melting Extaly, thou alone caffst give, will recompenfe a thoufand
fuch
I
[	1
fuch UneafinefTes.  -— D—this
confounded Hurry of BuSinefs, which has debarfd me of Thee thefe five Days, and forced me last: Night to make ufe of my Pillow which was as infipid as a —-,
LETTER XX.
To Mr. L-----------
SIR,
IS it pofiible that a Man of Honour
and good-Naturc, as Mr. L---------
should be flirr’d by imaginary Injuries to treat his Friend after So furprizing and inhuman a Manner, as the taxing me with Crimes to him whofe Welfare you must needs be fenSible I have ever had, and shall continue, the most tender Regard for. I protest folemnly, So far have I been from harbouring a Thought of Dishonour to your Family, that I prefer it every Way to my own ; and would fooner run on my Damnation than offer Injuries, or omit
E X	Opportu-
t ]
Opportunitcs of paying my grateful Acknowledgements for your lingular Favours,* I am not infenfible the real Offence taken was more justly grounded, unhappily, by one we are unable to contend with. And it is a great Misfortune to have it placed to my Account, which I shall ufe my fpeediest Endeavours to acquit my felf of, by straining my utmost Interest to give you all the Satisfaction you can require, as a Gentleman who have fo much obliged, and may fo entirely command.
Tour mofi humhle Servant,
W. W I I, s o N,
Olfervations
C ip )
m	w* fti Wi r4 r4
3>.S >i*S J'/.'? Ji.S J'-Sn J'aS J'avS J>kS JW ,o,^ rftii 5^»S Jw? J-aS J'aS JiK
Qhfervatiom on the foregoing
LETTERS.
;	T is evident by the Beginning
-	^	Letter, that theSe
* gtel- S was a preeeeding one from his Lordship, but ivrote in So ambiguous a Manner that Wilfiky who was sts yet a Stranger to his Paffion, could not by that be induc’d to accept the Challenge • which put his Lordship on another Project, and naturally led him to imagine thaf a Cash-Note imuft be the only Bait td draw this colL Infenfille, Yet even this Letter was not open enough to difeover, die Sex of the Writer.;, for Wil-fon m the following one appears with all the Extafies of an impatient Lover, in the delufive Expectations of meeting a fine Lady; which, undoubtedly, were rais’d from the Words of the unknown, who fays, Where to ^tve and receive excefs of Tleafure was to have been the only Combate between us. But had he consider’d how awkwardly the polite Softnefs of that Sex is imitated, the most Jafeivious of them generally expresting themfelves, tho*
in
if
C ?o )
in as Passionate, yet in a much decenter Manner, he would Soon have been convinc’d of his Error, especially, by the last Line, where he fays you. may fecure me e* uer joursy which is different from the Sentiments of the Fair, who know their chief Power is in gaining, and all their Hopes to keep depends only on the Faith of the Lover. What the Confequcnce of that interview \yas, appears through the whole courfe or thefe Letters ; but the next of them muss: Surprize the Reader, where he fees So unnatural an Appetite express’d info tender, passionate, andob-Scene a Manner ; but what will appear most strange is his Lordship’s Orders to WilfoH to be drefs’d for this amorous Encounter in the Habit of the Sex he shews So great a Contempt for:
By this Time we perceive their Intimacy was very great, and that it was the Interest of both to prevent the least Difeovery ; for Wilfon became the Wonder of the whole Town, who from being a private necessitous Dependant on Fortune, Seem’d now to be the Ruler of her; the Eyes of all were turn’d on him f his Splendor, Gayety, and DreSs was the Delight of the Fair, and the Envy of his own Sex; Some were rcSolv’d
to
C 50
to find but 'the hidden Source of all his Grandure, and destroy this Meteor of Profufenefs ; the feyeral Conjectures made on him, and their Refolutions were difeovefd by his Lordship, as we find in Letter IV. Who to frustrate their De-figns agrees to be at the Head of the Conspiracy, and prefs to know the Secret of his Living ; Wilfon being thus apprifed of their Defigns, guarded himfelf against them at their Meeting, where his Lord-ship, as before agreed, infisted on the Discovery of it, but he, pretending a Refentmcnc, left TunhndgCt and, shortly after, in order to prevent the least SuSpicion of his Lordship's being in the Secret, Sent word by Some of his Friends, in a publick Manner, that he thought himfelf injur’d by this Treatment; and, in particular, by his Lordship; that it did not become a Per-fon of his Lordship’s Character to be concern’d in Such an Affair, tho’ to One So much his Inferior ; his Lordship, in as publick a Manner, own’d himfelf in the wrong, and, at the fame Time, hinted that Somebody very powerful must Support him. This was their first Plot to destroy Suspicion; the rest which I shall relate, must, by all, be own’d to be Masterpieces in their kind, and to excel the most
Jesuitical
C 5^ )
Jesuitical Dcfigns that ever were known i this Managciiient may convince the World that his Lordship was ho lefs a Politician in his private Affairs, than he Was in the Publick ; he feems iiimfelf highly pleas’d with it, hecaufe by that he had left them in a greater Perplexity than eyer^
But thoVno light could be gain’d front thence, yet not long after, an unlucky Accident fell out, which had it not been counter-manag d with abundance of Art and Cunning, muff inevitably have discover’d their Intimacy, and cast an everlasting Odium on them y for it having been coitjectufd that Mrs. V'	i
Cwho is the great LAD F mention d in Letter VI. ) was the Perfon who had thus rais’d him, and coming to her Knowledge, she was very uneafy, believing if fuch a Report Spread, it might Oc :a-Aon a Difference between her and the Power who Supported her; but certainly nothing but a Secret Esteem for him ; with that Curiofity, natural to her Sex, could induce her to So formidable an Attempt to discover his mysterious Affairs. In order to this , she Set Spies to watch him from Place to Place,
who
[ S3 1
who found he ufually din’d with different People of Quality, and Saunter’d away the Afternoon at Court, Park, or Play, with Such other Amuferaents ^ and that often about ten at Night he difmifs’d his Equipage, and took a Chair, which carry’d him to a private Houfe near HytIe Park Corner, into which he enter’d by a Key he had with him ; where they waited to obferve who elSe went in or outj but nothing was Seen to move or stir in or about the Houfe still about Five the next Morning, at which Time he generally return’d.
After this Mrs. V—//—s Sent one of her Spies there to enquire for Lodgings, a Bill being on the Door for that Pur-pofe, who was anfwer’d by an old Woman who kept the Houfe, that she did not care for Men ^ the next Day she Sent another Spy, who enquir’d for Lodgings for a young Lady, who was told by the fame old Woman, that Women Lodgers she could by no Means fatigue herfelf with ^ which plainly Convinc’d them that her Bill was only a Blind.
Mrs. V—It—s Curiofity was heighten’d by all this to that Degree, that she could tiot rest ’till farther Difcoveries we-re made ^ they found a back Paffage to the Houfe, by which they Suppofed Some Per-
F	Son
.[ 34 1
fori gave him a Meeting there^ accordingly, the HouSe being on both Sides carefully watch’d, Wilfori went in the Street Way, as uSual, ancf in lefs than an Hour after, the Old Woman provided a Chair at the Back-Door, which was immediately fill’d by one in the Habit of a Lady, whom they follow’d to the Nobleman’s j about four Hours after, they faw the fame PerSon return to the Back-Door, and shortly after, Wilfon went out at the Street* Door dirediy Home.
Mrs. F—//—s finding it to be a frequent Pradice, concluded, this fine Lady who made her Midnight Vifits fo constantly to my Lord, could be no other than Wilfon himSelf, but was re-folved to be thoroughly Satisfy’d, and as Women are quick at Invention, she and her chief Engine, whom I shall call , Johnafco^ contrived to have him arrested in his Chair ^ which was accordingly done, to the great Surprize of the Seeming Dame, who alledg’d that the Name and Adion were falSe, and dared them to detain him at their Peril ^ but they infisted they were not afraid to anSwer what they did, and if she would not pay down the Debt, which was laid vastly high, they must do their Duty in Securing her ’till she gave in Bail ^ and
not-
[ 3! ]
iaotwithstanding he flrenuouSly iniiSfed they were miftaken, they carry’d him to a Spunging-houSe, and lock’d him up by himSelf, where he was a fliort Time left to rested on this Surprifing USage, when Johnafco came into the Room, who with the Pretence of taking him for a Lady, after a Preamble of Complements gave him to understand he was violently in Love with him ^ and that judging by
his Midnight Vifits to my Lord-----^—
his Affedions (unfortunately for him) were there pre-engag’d, he had contriv’d, this Stratagem to get him in his Power, which he was refolved not to part with hill his Happinefs was compleated •, by Degrees he began to prefs for indecent Liberties, which was repuls’d with great Modesty on IVilforis Side, but in fpite of all his Strength and Reststance, the Lover Soon found a Cure for his pretended Pastion, by discovering him to be of his own Sex, which chang’d his amorous Addreffes into as feeming furious a Rage, threat’ning to kill him unarm’d, unlefs he would confefs what all thofe dark Doings meant ^ but finding him too steady to be moved by fuch Menaces, he shifted the Scene of Fidelity to Mrs. V-~IV--Sy staggering at the Sight of Wil-fins Gold and" PromiSes, which out-
F2	weigh’d
[ 3'^ ]
weigh’d his Hopes Srom the other Qjrar-ter • thus began the Acquaintance twQtnJohnafco and fVilfon, which in the End prov’d fatal to the latter, tho’ for the prefent he had Secur’d hiin his Creature.
Johnafco returned to Mrs. F—//—j, who was on the Rack of Expectation to know the Event of her Plot *, when feeing him, with eager Impatience she ash’d him his fuccefs ^ he reply’d, I have discover d. Madam, that the Perfon whom you fuSpeded to he Wilfon, is really fo ^ but tho I have us’d my utmost Endeavours, both by Threats and Promifes, to difclofe the Mistery of thefe midnight Visits, I could by no Means prevail ^ he behav’d himSelf with fo refolute an Obstinacy, that I fear if he is longer detain’d, it may be very injurious to you ^ I believe he would be glad to excufe ushat is past, to be fet at Liberty • how-ever, I have yet Some Hopes of prying into the Caufe of this Intrigue. Mrs. V—'ll—s jefiestin^ on what’ Johnafco had Said, which I fuppofe JVilfon had order’d him to fay,* intending by that Means to confound and blind het in whaf she had already found but, gave Orders for his ReleaSe, leaving the entire Management of it to Johnafco^ ^
Not
> ,i •
[ !7 ]
Not long after this, my Lord addrefs’d to Mrs. V—ll—j, to obtain a Trifle of the King, with Such a Complaifance and an infinuating Refped, that she readily comply’d with his Request, being willing to oblige a PerSon of his Interest, thinking at the fame Time, that her Civility in that Affair would prevent his fuSpeding her to have a Hand in tlie Defign against Wilfon.
Some little Time after, my Lord being out of Town, Johnafco inform’d her that he had made one of my Lord’s Servants his Friend, but could not find by him that any Lady came to my Lord in that private Manner • but that one Night, walking in the Garden, which he had frequently done, both before and fince my Lord went out of Town, to make Discoveries, he perceiv’d a Lady, the Shape and Height as Wilfon appeared to be of in his Female Drefs, come in at the Garden Door, go to one of the Parlour Windows, and give a Small Rap, which immediately open’d for her Reception *, Some Time after she was got in, she crept clofe to the Window, and heard low talking, but could not distinguish either the Words or Voices ^ on Enquiry, he found it was the Steward’s Apartment, who was a French Gentle-
" man
[
man who pretended to have left his state and Country on the Score of Relir gion, and with his Daughter fled into England. When he had told Mrs.N—//—s this, with other Circumstances, which he thought would confirm her Belief of it, he gave his Opinion, that he thought it could not be my Lord that IVilfon came to, he being at that Time out of Town ^ that perhaps the Steward might not be fo great an Enemy to the French Interest as he pretended, therefore there must be fomething extraordinary in that mi-sterious Proceeding ^ which if, fays he, my Lord is ignorant of, as I am inclin’d to believe, he wou’d be the properest Perfon in finding it out, having a Power over his Steward to call him to an Account, it being his own Houfe in which the Defign is carry’d on.
Mrs. F—//—t, who believ’d all he faid to her, according to his Advice, acquainted my Lord with it as foon as he came to Town, who pretending a great Surprize, made a thouSand fufpicious Gonjedures; with a ReSolution to Search into the Meaning of it y and conSulting wdth her concerning the best and Surest Method for Difcovery, it was at last a-greed, that Johnafco and another of her Creatures should be on the Watch in the
Garden,
[ 39 ]
Garden, as uSual, till they Saw JVilfori approach, which they did not ’till the fourth Night Johnafco immediately ran to acquaint my Lord ^ after Some Small Time the Steward was order’d to be call’d for, who was not to be found ^ my Lord then pretending that he wanted Some Papers that were in his Custody, went to his Apartment with Johnafco and the other PerSon, broke open the Door, where they found Wilfon confufed, and his Female DreSs very much ruffled y the Steward’s Daughter, Surpriz’d at the unexpeded Coming of my Lord, and for the Shame of being thus expos’d, ran to the Bed, endeavouring to hide herfelf in the Cloaths ^ ray Lord turning to Johnafco Said, I perceive this is only a plot on a French Petticoat : So left the Lovers, and went with Johnafco and the other to Mrs. V—//—j, where he show’d a Fund of Wit, and diverted himSelf in a Ridicule on the Pains they had all taken about Such a Trifling Intrigue. Thus, by the private Help of Johnafco., was she brought to believe she had found out the real Truth of Wilfon\ Defigns -when, in Fad, ’twas only a Counter-Plot to destroy her just SuSpicions.
How Wilfon got into the Favour of the French Girl I know not ^ but we may
eafily
[ 40 ]
eafily fuppofe that my Lord, who took Such Pains to deceive Mrs. V—ll—j, contriv’d with him that the Girl shou’d be firft gain’d e’er they put in Execution this artful Projed.
I know not whether to impute the De-fign of this Surprizing Counter-Plot to his Lordship or yir.Wilfont^ but certain it is, that without it they had been discover’d. 1 have often heard that the World would never allow IVilfon to be a Man of any Parts or Capacity ^ but by thefe few Letters of his, efpecially by Letter IX, he Seems to be perfedly Skill’d in the Art of Infinuation ^ whether inspir’d by my Lord’s excellent Genius, or his Gold, I will not pretend to determine, perhaps it was the latter, iffade him feel all thoSe Pangs we find he ex-preffes in So lively and reSpedful a Manner to his Lordship.
While Wilfon was out of Town for the Recovery of his Health, from whence he wrote the abovemention’d Letter, my Lord was diverted in Some MeaSure from his Paffion for IVilfon^ by a young Lady whom he had Seduced from her Friends ^ and in Order to excufe him Self to TVilfon^ fays. It was not fo much tO amufe the dull Dime in his tedious Abfence.i as to Jiop the World's good~natuPd RefleWions on his /»-
difference
[4t ]
'difference that Wa) ^ but I ihould be inclined to believe he diffembled with him, did not the following Story, which I had from a Relation of ray Lord’s, shew he stuck at nothing tho’ ever So vile to accomplish his Ends ^ and as the Gircura-stances agree with this Letter, 1 am convinc’d it is the fame Perfori he hints at therein.
This Lady, (my Lord’s Relation) at the Request of CloriPs, Parents, brought her to Town, that she might have the Advantage of a genteelerEducation than the Country could afford ^ in order to which, no Expence was Spar’d, by which she might be improv’d 5 she introduc’d her into the Company of most People in Town,, and at the Same Time took Care to instill into her the Principles of Modesty and Vertue, as the furest Guards against the too frequent Temptations of Men.
Claris was tall, tho’ very young, a lively Vivacity in her Looks, and a I^prightlineSs in het Words arid AdioriSj^ that rather inclin’d to ill-natur’d Satire^ than a well-bred PoliteneSs^ My Lord, who uSed frequently to vifit there, Was, when not restrain’d by Policy or Civility, of a troubleSome peevish Temper ^ and |)Oor Chris, Who retain’d^ in Spite of
G	her
C 4^ ]
her Dancing - Master, Some awkward Country Airs, had her Patience perpetually exercis’d by his Splenatick Rested-ions, which she did not Sail to return with a LartneSs that occafion’d Such Clashings between them, as created a thorough Hatred for each other.
She had often heard that his Lord-ship s handSome Perfon formerly made ’ great Iinpreffions on the Ladies, and was reSolv’d to det him fee he had outliv’d that x'ittradion, by taking an Opportunity before Company, to run Pins in his fdlfe Calves, to shew them that Age had depriv’d him of his natural ones , which childish Trick he reSented fo deeply, that from that Moment he study’d to be reveng’d on her, to which he was encouraged likewise by a particular Incident :
A Lady v/ho was there vifiting, falling into Difeourfe with him about the Virtues and Vices of the Female-Sex, he af-ferted that Vice was the most predominate in them on his own Knowledge ^ the Lady as warmly^ maintaining the contrary : The Argument was heighten’d still they came to Particulars, he affirming, no Woman was Proof against the Importunities of a Man absolutely re-folved to gain her, be it ever fo disadvantageous to her Reputation or Interest :
Upon
f
[ 43 ]
Upon which the Lady {piquM with what he Said) made AnSwer, And do you believe that even your Lordship, Supported by the mighty TreaSures you poffeSs, with that powerful AddreSs you are Master of, could obtain Cions in a dishonourable Way } Grounding her Challenge on the Hatred she had obServM the Gin conceiv’d against him : To which he made Some trifling Reply, and turn’d the DiScourSe •, but was reSolv’d within himSelf tp convince them both he had Youth enough left, as well as fafliionable Galantry, to work her Ruin. From that Time he began to pay more frequent Vifits than uSual, and So Soften’d his Manner to his intended Prey, that he foon infinuated himfelf into her Favour j he readily inclined to any pne that Seemed to admire her PerSon or Parts, willing to gratify her little Pride and Vanity, by shewing her Acquaintance she de-ferved to be distinguish’d above them, as Superior in Wit and Beauty. Thus prepar’d by the natural Failures of her Sex, and wrpught up by his Artifice, it will appear no mighty Difficulty, if one of leSs Skill than this great StateSman, should carry off a Prize of higher Value than it Seems he ever esteem’d her to be. Having 4:hus obtain’d a Gont^uest he had
G 2	"	no
[44]
_ . ^
no further Regard to than that of making it Subservient to his Ends, as the amufing the dull Time in the AbSence of his be-^ loved Minion, and to shew his irrefistible Power with the Fair, but more particularly to make good his Affertions with the Lady who preSumed to diSpute his Influence: TheSe, with Some few other ReaSons, induced hirn to keep Cloris in So grand a Way, as iilight make the Lofs of her Reputation" the more remarkable, which the poor deluded Wretch attributed to the Effeds of his Lordship’s violent Paffion for her PerSon. ' By this Time Wilfon returned to Town, and was alarm’d at fo Seeming a dangerous Rival getting into his Lordship’s Favour while ' he was abSent *, but when he found by the AnSwer his Power was not diminish’d, his Jealoufy abated and the Fondnefs his Lordship expresses in Letter XIII, shew’d him how ready he was to comply with any Thing he de{ir’d, tho’ of more Difficulty than turning off a MiSfreSsp ^ She had now Serv’d all the Defigns he had on her and not being willing to Support an Expence he had no farther Occafion for, he thought fit to let her know by a Letter he was thorougly Sen-fible of her ill Condud, and Secret Correspondence with another, which Ingratitude
i ■ w.- 'O V...
[45 3
titude had So difobliged him, that fcf inuft not preSume to think of him any more, nor attempt to be troublefome by impertinent MefTage$, or complaining Scrawls. The poor Girl Thunderstruck at this unexpeifed Expulfion from his Lordship’s Favour, af a Time wheri jshe thought her Self fully Secur’d of it.
' All the delightful Idea’s She had form’d of her future Grandeur, and the Splendid Way of Living, she was just arrived at, were now changed to the dreadful Apprehenfions of future Shame and Wants : Now she began to think her Charader and Interest with her Friends were blasted and ruin’d for ever. Some Time she remain’d under the greatest DistreSs of Mind, without Courage to endeavour her Justification to my Lord, or Reconciliation to the Lady she had fo rashly eloped from ’till by Degrees she rally’d up Spirit enough to attempt the former, tho’ she could not the latter, not being conScjous of his AccuSations 5 but finding all her Protestations, and Softest Submiffions, nay even her acquainting him with her moving Condition of being pregnant, and the Distref-Ses she was reduced to, not only fruitless, but return’d with Contempt and Hatred, she refolved to revenge herSelf ‘ ^	on
I
[4«]
on the Author of her MiSeries • she pro-vided herSelf with a Man’s Habit, and according to the Intelligence she had got, she watch’d an Opportunity of meet- ' ing^ him as he return’d from Kenfmgtoii., which fell out to her Defire toward the Dufk of the Evening 5, she made Signs to flop the Coach, and approaching his Lordship with great Refped, begg’d she ^might be admitted to a private Audience with his Lordship about a Matter of high Importance to him, which requir’d his in-llant Knowledge of *, tho’ Somewhat Surpriz’d, his Lordship’s Curiofity was rais’d to know what it was •, and not SuSpedfing any ill Defign, nor being at all prejudic’d to a Youth So beautiful, he very readily comply’d with his Request, and walking with her to a more retir’d Place in the Park, where they could diScourfe with Freedom, the poor Girl, fully bent on her rash Undertaking, began to upbraid him with baSely deluding her from her Parents and Family, destroying her Virtue and Reputation, and then thrusting her forth to Such Infamy and MiSery, as must infallibly fall on one left in her a-bandon’d Condition ^ then preSented a Pistol to his Breast : His Lordship, who had a Spirit above being Surpriz’d with Fear, push’d it by with as much Contempt,
[ 47 ]
tempt, as if she had rapt his Knuckles with her Fan, feeing her manage it afteC So timorous and awkward a Manneri he eafily wrench’d it. out of her Hand, and pretending to take her for a Bully (tho* her Voice, DiScourSe, and effeminate Fears must needs diScover her to him) she had Sent to affafiinate him. Swore he would chastize him with his own Hands, which he did in So unmerciful a ,Manner, that she quickly funk down at his Feet under the Violence of his repeated Blows and Kicks, where he had the Inhumanity to leave her expoSed to what Chance or Providence allotted. This barbarous U-fage to a Woman, and with Child by himSelf, plainly shews what a Hatred he had to the whole Sex *, for no Man that was not given to the most abandon’d Vices could treat them whofe tender Delicacy courts and invites our Protestion, with Such unheard of Cruelty. The forlorn Clovis having Iain Some Time without SenSe or Motion, recover’d So far as to feel extreme Pains, which she express’d in melancholy Groans, that were heard by a Soldier who accidentally came that Way, who with great Humanity took Care to get her into a Hackney Coach, that drove according to her Orders to the private Lodging she had taken
to
V
lo shift her Female Drefs. The Agonies which this brutal Treatment stung her into, brought the Pains of Labour strong upon her y and believing her miserable Life was near it’s End, she gave Diredi-6ns to the Soldier to go to the Lady from whom she unfortunately abSconded, and destre her to .come immediately y who ihuch Surpriz’d with Such a Meffage from a Gentleman at the Point of Death, knew not what, to, do, heing apprehen-, five of foihe ill Defign y ’till being preSs’d by the Meffenger, who told her the diS-mal Condition he had found him in, and that he conjur’d^ her to come, not being able to die ini Peace Without feeing hery she went under the Guard of a Gentleman.* No Soorier had she enter’d the Chamber, biit casting her Eyes on Clovis theri iri Bed, she knew her y upori which she difmifs’d the Gentleman that came with her, arid approaching near the Bed, all her steSentment for Clovis* ill Goridud gave Place to Compastiori, at Seeing her i in that deplorable Conditiori y W-liich the Girl perceiving by her Tears, Said, Is it possible that you, who have So just a Right to reproach my Guilt arid Folly, can pity a Wretch whoSe Life you fee thus miSerably torn from her by the cruel Author of her Crimes ? The Lady ■
arifwer’d
'i
[ 49 ]
anfwer’d her very mildly, finding both her Griefs and Pains extream • which gave Some EaSe to her distrasted Mind, tho’ to her Pains it was imposhble ^ for after a Continuance of them for three or four Days, she was deliver’d of a dead Child, two Months before its Time, and immediately expir’d.
Thus fell the unfortunate C/nm, a Sacrifice to one who had not even the Ex-cuSe of once liking her ^ but work’d her Ruin, to gratify his own Pride, and mortify hers.
F I N I S.
\