inches

10III|IIIiOiii|IIII|2III|I>ii|3III|IIII|4III|IIII|5III



o< Si
in m
dots p*r incli («90C«I)
CO CO
1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11 (A)	12	13	14	15
39.12	65.43	49.87	44.26	55.56	70.82	63.51	39.92	52.24	97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06	62.15
13.24	18.11	-4.34	-13.80	9.82	-33.43	34.26	11.81	48.55	-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19	-1.07
15.07	18.72	-22.29	22.85	-24.49	-0.35	59.60	-46.07	18.51	1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28	0.19

M-\
I|7 I I I I I I I I|gI I I
w
I |d> 1111111
centimeters
10
D50 llluminant, 2 degree observer
Density
0.04
0.09
0.15
0.22
0.36
0.51

Tfbr^ad



<
I	O I
I	to I
to
16 (M)	17	18(B)	19	20	21	22	23	24
49.25	38.62	28.86	16.19	8.29	3.44	31.41	72.46	72.95
-0.16	-0.18	0.54	-0.05	-0.81	-0.23	20.98	-24.45	16.83
0.01	-0.04	0.60	0.73	0.19	0.49	-19.43	55.93	68.80
29.37
13.06
-49.49
0.75
0.98
1.24
1.67
2.04
2.42
*

■i	......................:•

54.91
-38.91
30.77
43.96
52.00
30.01
28
Colors by Munsell Color Services Lab


&s3BsoBy55oa5fittggs^oo
“O	
q; OQ 0)	“n O
to	Q-
—1	O
O	c
O	to • •
oq‘ • •	








h "	*1'



52.79
50.88
-12.72
50.87
-27.17
-29.46

• •



i;

-


IK . ^
^5
4? ^
\
U
II
0
0
0
0
LEVINA FOSTER.
9
9
%zz
Wqz’?.
v.l
THE
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER
7'J:	■	• 10


- /
f •

\
*1
\ ✓

r

\
\

/•
s

)
T U 2
W R
A T H
O F
FRIENDSHIP
O R,
A RETURN FROM
\
I N D I A.
A NOVEL,
IN A SERIES OF LETTERS
rRODESSE XT SBLXCTARX.
IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. I.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR
WILLIAM LANE, LEADENFALL-STREET.
M DCC XC,
U. of ?a.
Lbrery
/
T O
Mrs. M
WHOSE ELEGANT PEN
AND
POLITE
ACCOMPLI SH ME NTS
RENDER HER THE
PATRONESS
OF THE LADIES,
THE FOLLOWING
LETTERS
ARE RESPECTFUL LY
LN SCR T,B E D;
^	'*•-3 ■-
•C-. ■ .

Cs3
co^
005
/
PREFACE.

(D
0
>
V
o
-J
^0
%
4
O.
d
(I
T may perhaps be thought remarkable, that the Editor of
a Novel fhould be the
very
perSon to decry Such performances. The World abounds in
i
contradictions, and this is one of them. Yet mistake me not, gentle reader, I would not affright thee at the very entrance of the following; work. Neither fhould
o
any man be misted by names. The generation of novels has Sprung up like Hydras, and in
general

• • #
s
vm.
PREFACE-
general they are equally noxious
f
to Mankind. With a Smiling face they often plant a dagger, and convey a Subtile poiSon in a Sweetened potion. There have been authors, however, who have endeavoured, under this appearance to reprove and to instruct. They have taken advantage of this mode of publication, to instil ufeful lestons; and, as it were by accident, to arrest the attention of thoSc who Seldom look into a more Serious
book
/	A
1'^:
PREFACE.
IX.
It may be Said of modern No-
I
velsj as of many of the old Romances, posterity must look into thefe for a true delineation of the manners of the times. If this be So, how Should we blufh to fee the picture of the preSent day ? Too Surely fhall we be condemned by our own children, if we can deliver to them no better monuments of our wiSdom. The Editor of the following streets does not pretend to determine
J'
what rank they will hold in the estimation of the public, nor give any reaSon for their appear-
ance
&
X
P R E F A C
ance. One thing only may be alledged in their defence, and that is a deSire to amufe ; and if they {ball Sometimes step a little further, and endeavour to instruct, it is prefumed the candid reader will receive them at least
'	-f
with approbation.
the

LANE’s
NOVEL REPOSITORL
JUST PUBLISHED,
Sold by all Booksellbr.s, axMD to be read AT EVERY Circulating Library.

A R U L I Ai
Or, The VICTIM or SENSIBILITY
z Vcls. lamo. 5s. fewed.
ADELINE
3 Vols, i2mo. 7s. 6 1. Sewed.
Velina de g u i d o va
r
3 Vols. lamo. 7s. fid. fewed.
ELOISA de CLAIRVILLE

« Vols, izmo. 5s. fewed.
J
MEMOIRS
AND
OPINIONS
Mr. B L E N F I E L D.
By THE Author of Tales of SyMPATHr;
2. Vols. lamo. cs. fewed.

COUNTESS OF HENNEBON,
AN HISTORIC STORY.
3 Vols.	7s. 6d. fewed.

W. Lane begs to inform any perfon, either in town or country, defirous of commencing a Cir* culating Library, that he has always, ready bound, feveral thoufand volumes, in Hiftory, Voyages, Novels, Plays, fuitabje for that purpofej and that he will be happy in inftrufting them in the manner of keeping a Reading Library* On an ad-drefs to him at Leadenhall-street, they may receive an immediate fupply of entertaining books#
Any lady or gentleman having INovels, &c# in manufenpt, which they would wiSh introduced to the public, on favouring a line, may depend on having them printed in the mpll correct and dega»t
V.
mannert
Ill ti ji li
— *
if'l "« ;

THE
WREATH
Q F
ERIENDSH ILL
LETTER
L
Mrs. Scudamore to Mifs Darnl'ey
•r
Madras., jfuly 23,1786.
AS H IP is under fail for Eng-
land. What joy would be contained in that little Sentence, if it were to convey poor Emily to her Eliza !—But alas! no fuch felicity is in {lore for your friend ! Deftined to confume years of fplendid mifer||^ Hope has nothing to reft upon, but our return again to that dear country
VoL I.
B
2 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
where alone we may find tranquillity, and where alone are thoSe who wifh to promote it. Yes, my dear Eliza, the dream i s at an end; and I awake to a juft SenSe of thofe fcenes which once danced before my imagination
in fuch gay and alluring colours, and
which at that time had power to con-foie me even for a Separation from you. But ambition Shall no longer cciiiroul my heart, which once more 'ays itSelf at your feet with all its infantine tenderneSs; divefted, perhaps, of Some of	follies^ but full of that
afeBion which rolling years have in-creafed, and which your merit and your love fo amply demand.
But why do I begin a letter to you in this melancholy ftrainWhy do I not firft tell you that I am in health, that myhulbandis fo too, and that he ftili
loves
.WREATH OF friendship.
loves me!—all which is fbriftly true. Then why, ungrateful Emily, com-
She
once
plain ? It is, thought Splendor and magnificence would conSole her for thofe friends, and that country, fhe abandoned;
V
that Ihe mould return loaded with riches, to the Same pleafures, the fame Society, and the fame attachments. ileaSon and reflection have at laftdrawn aSide the veil Spread by avarice and ambition. 1 perceive that it is pofiible I
to return to my native land in a much more affluent fly le than that in which I left it; but with a conftitution unable to enjoy what it is in my power to purchaSe, and a mind that has loft all relifli for every thing but the balm of friendfliip, which no one remains to adminifter.
mav
B

4' WREATH Of FRlEHtiSHlPi
Reflexions like theSe occupy the greater part of thoSe hours, which, while our fortunes were moderate v/ere Spent in the aXive exertions of benevolence. To the inhabitants of this fultry clime, indolence is not only an obligation but a neceflity, and I begin to fear the laflitude of the body will affeX the mind; for I fancy, that my ideas are not So lively as they uSed to be. My hufband laughs at my fears, and perfuades me, ( or endeavours to do So ) that I am quite as agreeable as ; he fays, the women here want life and fpirit, and are fo uninform’d, that I need not be under any appre-henlions of loling the charaXer I have
ever
already eftablilhed.
There is one thing that adds greatly to my diflike of this place, the al-moft impoflibility of hearing from my
Englifh
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 5
Enelilh friends; I have had but one let-
O
ter from you fince 1 arrived, and furely one letter in two years, is a poor recompence for whole months Spent in anxiety and expedation. This is the conftant complaint here, but it is not the lefs diSagreeable to me that I have partners in my concern. I beg you will never Send me any thing but by the company's pacquet, as letters given to private hands Seldom arrive. My letters to you, it Seems, have been equally unfortunate. I was weak enough, you may remember, to imagine, that the care I had taken of Diana’s education, and the favours I had bellowed on her would have kept her in my Service, as I dreaded the vei y idea of being waited on by ftrangers; I thought ( tho*really a pretty girl) that her attachment to me would have kept her in my Service, till at lead I

B 3
had
W-RIATH ©F FRIENDSHIP

had got a little inured to the ctifloms and the natives of this place. She was indeed very attentive to me on the voyage, and her cheerfulneSs helped to Support me under the fatigues of it; but we had no Sooner arrived here, than a young man who had Seen her land, came to enquire her chara(5ter, and men-
tioned his intention of mar
Tying
her. Should it meet with my approbation. I will confeSs to you that for a moment I was very felfilh, the
thought
s
of being
left entirely to
new people were dreadful, and I was half inclined to inlift on her Services; but affedion got the better of Self, and I Said all for her that I really knew She deServed. The young man immediately made his propoSals which were accepted. She attempted, to Say Something in her defence; and as I Saw the
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 7
joy that had taken poITeffion of her heart, I was determined to throw no damp upon it. I forgave every thing but my own folly, in dilbelieving what my friends told me would be the con-fequence. She now viSits me in a moft fuperb palanquin, and is oi\ an
•4
equality with moft people here*
This reminds me, that I have never once told you the hiftory of poor Eleanor Gaylove, whom I think you took notice of, when you left me on
board the Indiaman, Her father, who
4'
lives at St. Helena, had Sent her over to England under the care of general M------, to be educated; and Ihe was
to return with him when he Ihould be again ordered to India, which it was more than propable would be the cafe in a few years. This, as was expected.
took place the very year of our de-
/
B 4
parture;
t
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
parture; her cloaths were all packed up with Mrs. M-------
----*s, in whoSe Suite
fhe was to go ; and as they expeded to fail at a fhort warning Ihe had left fchool, and wa§ in the houfe with
Mrs.. M----*
It happened that their difpofition& were entirely oppolite to each other, and the confequence was a very high difagreement between the ladies. The general efpoufed his wife’s caufe, and Ihew’d Eleanor letters he had wTitten
to her father, with an account of her
✓
behaviour, which he refolved to fend in the fiiil fliip that Should fail. She had everv reafon to fear he would take this Step, but was fanguine enough to think his humanity would prevent fo
f *
cruel a procedure. The general did not fail in the Ihip firfl mentioned, but eager to get quit of his charge, he put
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 9
her on board the Minerva, with only half her wardrobe, the reft of her apparel being packed up with Mrs.M’s, who would not be at the trouble to Separate them. This however Seem’d noobftacle to our lively friend, fhe came amongft us as gay as a lark; exulting in the idea of feeing her parents, and that little country where all her hopes were centered; it contained, in the word home, every thing in her idea, that the heart could wifti- for,.
Every one was delighted’ with the little lively palTenger, whofe Spirits, I believe, contributed to keep her in^ health ; and fhe nurfed, rallied, and confoied every one. It was impoffible not to be fond of fo artlefs a creature; and we both grieved and rejoiced at fight of that ifland where fhe was to be left. We rejoiced on her account,
B 5'	and
\
16 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP'..
and mourned for our own lofs. On our anchoring, Mr. Scudamore waited on the governor, and'alSo on Mr. Gay-love, to inform him of his daughter’s arrival, left her immediate appearance,, when not expefted, might have fome bad effect.; but what was his afto-niftiment, to find that tliofe letters which general M— had threatened to fend, had really arrived ! That her father was inexorable, and would not-allow her to land, but abandoned her. to the winds and the waves,—-more merciful than himfelf,
\
We Mad fome difticulty onMriScud-amore’s return to the ftiip, to know in what manner to inform the poor
4.
girl of this cruel determination; and when told, what was to be done in con-fequence of it. A general council of women was called, who were, all una-
nimou

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. II
Dimous in offering every afliftance in their power; a wardrobe was formed out of the ftock which each of us pof-feffed, and it was determined to take her to India, and endeavour to make the bell of her defperate fituation,, I thought, poor girl ! fhe mufl: have died at being thus deSerted; but her happy difpofition got the better of the Shock, and in a few weeks after She had. left the illand, fhe became calm and compofed., On hearing we had determined to carry her to India, an d take: care of her, 1 thought gratitud e would. have had the fame forrowfui effed: which we expeded from misfortune.. She poffelfes one ofthofe difpofitions hat kindnefs may lead to any thing; but harih treatment hardens and ren-
I
ders obdurate what is naturally' a very noble, health
A
t


XZ WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP-
At Madras flie became my gueff:, and remained fo for Some months, till a gentleman of large property, an acquaintance of Mr. Scudamore’s, who lived at Cudalore, carne about fome buIineSs; he was frequently with us, was foon charmed with our ward, and offered her his hand, and a fortune almoft compleated. She told him how fenlible fhe was of his kindnefs, and hoped the efteem fhe had then for him would in time grow to affe<5lion, as fhe had no other prepoffeffion ;—if he was Satisfied with this confeflion fhe was entirely his. They were married.
Madras
and fhe
now writes to me that fhe is the hap piefl of mortals.

<• >
General M— has fet every thing to rights with her parents, his refentment
having fubfided before he reached St*
Helena i
/
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP

Helena; and they have written to her moft kindly, acculing themSelves in the Severed; terms of their cruelty, and wilhing only for the happineSs of bleffing her before they die. Her hulband talks of quitting India in a Ihort time, and returning to Spend the remainder of his days in England. I will write by her, and introduce her to your acquaintance, as I think her extremely amiable. Mr. Scudamore comes to tell me I mud ceafe Scribbling, as the pacquet mud be made up to day. Adieu, my deared, bed friend; think of me often, and believe me evc^
your s
Emily Scudamore,
Mn
14 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Mr. Scudamore in continuation
I have been quarrelling with Emily, becauSe Ihe will not permit me to read her letter to you, 1 have therefore told her plainly,that fhe may be jealous if Ihe chufes, but I am determined to write to you myfelf, if it is only for the pleaSure of abuling her, which I certainly jfhall do very heartily; and you will allow, I am fure, that Ihe de-ferves no favour, who dares to write letters a hufband may not fee. I know . fhe fighs after England, tho’ Ilie would not have me know k ; but I will tell you^ that her lighs Ihall not lall long, for I will return as foon as my affairs are fettled; as that is uncertain, I would not mention a time to her which
perhaps
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 15
perhaps I might not be able to keep.
But I forget that I was going to
abuSe her. You will find how little
%
V
reaSon. I have to= indulge her, when I fay, that in fpite of the luxuries of this place fhe remains temperate,—in fpite of lovers, Ihe is chafte,—and in fpite of the climate fhe is beautiful. She does not game, tho’ nothing is So fafhion-able, —Ihe does not talk fcandal, tho* there is no other conversation in the circle which Ihe frequentsand to fum up all her crimes and mifde-meanors, Ihe reads fermons to her de» pendents! —Did you ever hear of fo unaccountable a woman ? or one fo unfit
' >
for this place?*
Farewell, Eliza, I truft Ilhall brin your friend to you in aihort time, with
i6
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
<■
as many virtues as flie had when you parted; and with as much love for you as you can poflibly expect from one who ( I believe ) doats upon
Your humble Servant,
Lionel Scudamore,

LETTER II.
Mifs Darnley, to Mrs. Scudamore.
FVansford-Houfey January 3, 1787.
GUR letter, my deareft Emily, was the moll welcome meffenger of Friendfhip. To hear you are well muft at all times give me pleafure, but particularly fo after a lilence which had given me great unealinefs. Let not unneceflary fear, my friend, embitter thofe comforts you at preSerrt poliefs ; my affection for you is always
the


WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. IJ
A
the Same, and whether you hear from me or not, my Sentiments can never alter. If it were not improper to Ihew any ligns of diScontent, I, too, would blame fortune for our Separation ; the bonds, however, of amity reach far beyond the diftance at which we are now placed ; love and kindneSs are not confined within the narrow circle of a Kingdom ; they Ihine alike in every clime, and every good heart alike feels
Si
their influence. Affeftion, as the bright luminary of the day, gilds the dawning of the morn, and addsfrefh lufbre to the evening Ihade. As our friendfhip was formed in that early period of life when the mind is moll fuSceptible of every tender fentiment, and has thro* Succeeding years increaSed in vigour, I doubt not but at the cloSe of life we Shall have the heartfelt fatisfadtion of refleding, that we have been mutual
T
l8 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Supports to each other; and Ihall have proved female friendihip, not merely a chimera, but a bleffing bellowed by heaven on favoured mortals to make this rugged life delightful.

You will cxpe<5t I iliould give you Some account of what is pafiing amongft your friends, but the truth is, I live fo retired, that, except in my own circle, I am almoft as little acquainted with the gay world as you are. With refpedt to myfelf, I Spend my time in purfuing the plan I formerly marked out. Our neighbourhood has Suffered moft Severely in the death of our amiable and worthy re6lor, Dr. Morton; to regret the lofs of fo good a man would be felfilh, yet you can Scarce imagine how much I want him; his advice was my guide, and his opinion, the tell by which I proved
all
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
S
All my adions; if he applauded, 1 could not have a doubt of doing right. His foul was as much Superior to flattery, as his firm mind was above being biaSs’d by any accident. His amiable wife dill continues in the vil-
lage ; and as the living is not yet dif-
pofed of, Ihe has not quitted the houfe.
My favourite, Fanny Weft, is very well married to a young farmer, who lives upon one of my edates, So that I dill enjoy her Society. Her hufband is a well informed, lenlible man, and I flatter mySelf I fhall at lad have the pleafure of feeing a happy matrimonial connexion. Don’t midake me, Emily, I mean not to cad a cenfure upon you,. or my other married friends; but you are ail at too great a didance for me to judge of your happineSs. Tell Mr.
Scud^
20
WREATH GF FRIENDSHIP.
Scudamore I am particularly obliged to him for his letter ; he could not have found a fubjedl more to my tafte than that he fixed upon. Your Story of Eleanor I thank you for, and well remember how much I was pleafed with her on board the Indiaman. It appears, Emily, very extraordinary, how any parents who were not altogether void of feeling, could at Such a time, and So fituated, forlake their child, tho’ her conduct had been ever fo imprudent. Where was that natural affection, which we fuppoSe Seated by inftinft in the heart .J* Had Ihe been an outcaft of fortune. Tent to plead for charity, how inhuman Ihould we have thought them to have refuSed their prote61 ion!—But a child! — a helpleSs girll who had no other friends but themfelves, and who, as their daughter, had never ofFended,-r-what
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 2t
excuSe can they plead? Well may they willi to Sec her, and beg her for-giveneSs! In the fight of heaven their crime is very grcan
But whither am I rambling? I have been fo Ihocked, that any creature, who has received So much from a merciful creator, Ihould ad: in Such a dired contradidion to all his laws, that I cannot write with patience on the fub-jed.
I am fo far from wondering at Diana’s condud, that I was all along convinced, that her chief motive for going along with you, was the prof-ped of preferment. If fhe is happy, I am fure you will feel fatisfied that you did not prevent her inclination from taking its full Scope, but allowed
Princefs
9
t
Si wreaTh of friendship
9
I look forward with great pleaSurc to the time when I Ihall once more See my Emily; I flatter mySelf, it will not now' be long. Support that time, which you are obliged to remain, with a firmnefs becoming your good understanding ; and remember, whilft you
t
are indulging a fretful dSfeOntent, you are deftroying the peace of a man you
I
have vowed to love and honour, and who'feems worthy of your tendernefs. I have Sent you all the newfpapers aiid magazines for the laft year; perhaps they may for a moment amufe, and make you forget you are fo far from one who loves you with an undilfem-bled affection, and who can with truth fubfcribe herfelf,
your faithful friend,
N
Eliza Darnley.
LETTER
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.

LETTER
III.
MiSs Darnley to Lady Julia Harcourt
PEansford-Haiife^ February 28,
Your letter, my Julia, gave me
infinite pleaSure; but yet it was attended with Some SenSations not fo^ perfectly agreeable. I felt alhamed to receive a letter from you, before I had once acknowledged thofe obligations I had fo lately experienced from your amiable family. My warmeft thanks are due to my dear Lady St. Clair, for her attention; her many qualifications have made an impreffion on my mind that time cannot efface, and my eft ambition is'to follow her fteps tho’ at an humble diftance. .Virtue cannot
but
24
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP*
but be admired in every lituation, but it miili be particularly plealing, when placed upon an eminence whfere So many are apt to turn giddy with their height.-—Your mother unites in her
V
perSon thoSe lejfer virtues^ as the world' are pleaSed to call them, which are yet difficult to attain, with qualifications of a more important nature. That winning grace with which Ihe acquits herfelf on the moll trifling occafion, attended with true piety, has made her in my opinion, a model, to follow which would be the furell road to perfe(51;ion«; How happy are you, my amiable friend, in Such a parent ? How many tears has the fight of Lady St. Clair ^ coll me ? I, too, Julia, had a parent, blelTed with heaven’s beft gifts, but alas ! I was deprived of her av a time when her advice was particularly ne-ceflary.- It was the will of heaven in
one
WRtAtH 6F TrIENCsIiIP. 25
one year to deprive me of both my amiable and ever to be lamented parents. That I may be forgiven for the mmy hours I haiVefpent in fruitless tears, and I doubt iinful regrets, is my earnest prayer.
You will tell me, Julia, l am .grave? can you wonder at my being So, left in this wide world without one near connexion, a folitary being ? and tho^ fortune has been liberal in her favours to me, I find many hours which might have been agreeably employed in pleaSant Scenes of domeftic intercourse. I am particularly happy, my Julia, in your friendlhip ? in you I centre all my love ; and whilft we continue in this world, I am Sure our firm band of amity will never be broken.
Vok L
€

\
26
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
You have often exprelTed a Surprize, and particularly in your laft letter, that I Iliould remain fo long in a State of celibacy. As I find m5.Dlf this morning in a Serious humour, I am determined to reSolve all your doubts. Frommy earlieft infancy, you may remember, I have been taught to rea-fon and reflect. My excellent parents gave this bias to my mind, which, in the Subsequent years of my life, I have
found produ<5live of the greateft hap-
pineSs. However, of this I may be certain, that if reaSon and refleftion have not always produced |as much poSitiv>e happineSs as I expe<5ted, they
N
have, at leaft,preServed me from many Scenes of wretchedneSs, which I might otherwise have encountered.
Upon looking through the world, and observing the married life with no
incurious

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 27
incvrious eye, I perceived ( or thought I perceived ) a want of that happincSs which unmarried lovers generally expedt. That connexion which has for its end every thing that is amiable and friendly to human nature; that connexion which was formed for the wifeft and beft purpoSes, is 5from the perverSe humours of mankind, frequently rendered a heavy yoke; a burthen difficult to be borne,
^	■ f .	'
This obfervation, my friend, does not imply a cenfure upon the State itfelf, but upon the perverSidn of fo Sacred an ordinance. Sincerely I can fay with Milton,
Hail wedded love, myfterious law ! by
<
thee,
Founded on feafon, loyal, juft, and pure, “Relations dear, and all the charities Of father, fon, and brother^, ftrft were known:
Perpetual fountain of domeftic Sweets I
C a
After
23
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
After making this honourable mention of matrimony, I may be allowed to condemn thofc who turn this
ft
houSeoflove, and manfion of peace, into a den of wild animals. Indeed, too frequently have I feen thoSe, who in every reSped had it in their power to make each other happy, labour with no common pains to procure mutual mifery, I do not absolutely fay that they ftudy the art of tormenting; yet So little do they endeavour to give pleaSure to each other. So Seldom do they think it neceffary, either to hear or forbear, that they drag through the remainder of their lives a miSerable ex-
4
iftence. I fay nothing ofthe children of Such unhappy marriages. Formed upon - the model of their parents, they Hep forth into life with the Same paf-fions and prejudices; and in their turn act the fame wretched part their parents did before them.	To
WREATH OP FRIENDSHIP. 29
To engage, then, in a matrimonial connexion, is a matter of much greater importance than the world generally imagines. If two perSons were to be (hut up together in a box, and fight till they were tired, then fleep and fight again, there would be nothing in-it; but when this contentious humour is to be handed down from generation to generation, when children’s children are to be the unhappy Sufferers, better is it to remain not only almoji, but altogether fuch ns I am*.
And now, my lively friend, I think I hear you fay I reafon too deeply. Perhaps that may be the cafe; but as I mull be the bell judge of my own happineSs, I Shall not attempt to maka any apology for the peculiarity of my
Sentiments.^ After this I doubt not but you will imagine that I am determined
C 3
to
30 WREATH OF FRIENDSHX'Pv
to remain in a ftate of old.maid-tfmi blit perhaps you may be miftaken. To many, a ftate of celibacy abounds with comforts, comforts which are not at all times to be exchanged for the preca-rious happineSs of a married ftate; yet when that happincSs does arrive, when love and confidence meet under the fame roof, adieu every thought of Solitary life. Weleomie thoSe tender charities^ that Milton Speaks of, which are produflive of the higheft ftate of happineSs our beings are capable of enjoying in this life; which Support us on our way through thofe pe r-plexed paths which muft be pafled by the happieft of mankind; and open a future proSpebt, where the deficiencies of this lower world will be eft febtually made up by uninterrupted love and perpetual delight. •

WREATH OP FRIENDSHIP. 3I
I will not apologize to you, my friend, for the Serious manner in which I have anSwered your letter; and only beg, that through every Scene of exiftence, I may find you the fame. Make my beft love to your dear father and mother, and tell them, my grateful heart will remember their kindneSs to me whilft it has any fern
chan gin g
O
Adieu, my Julia, your’s.
^liza Darnicy
C 4
LETTER
,3^-
WREATH OT fRl,ENBSHir>
L E T T E K
IV.
Lady Julia Harcourt, to MiSs Darnley
jLewngjion dthheyy March j
Have juft periiSed my dear Eliza^s letter, full-fraught with oldmaid-ifm, and cannot Say I am at all delighted with the Sentiments therein delivered. You Say, you have looked at the world with no incurious eye;So have numbers, without underftanding it. Pardon me, I don’t mean tliis as any refledlionoii your own judgment, on the contrary -but I will not pay any compliments that may look like flattery. The world, you may perhaps have heard, is large; and when you have Said that of it, you have affirmed
wliat

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
OA
-what is only certain about it. You may be told, indeed, it is wiSe, it is knowing, it is learned; or that it is a falSe world, a baSe degenerate world, a world of wickedne.fs; or that it is a flrange world; a whimSical world, -a cenforious world; this, I. fay, you may be told, and no one perhaps tell an untruth about it. Only remember this, that whatever fault or. failing"any per-
fons condemn in the
they
themSelves are almoll furs to be par-ticularly guilty of it.. Thus you can--not blame, me, for fo often, traverfing this Earth, drawing' in every day of my life fo many pints of air, eonfuming & much bread and water, without
having made one obfervatioa on the world. But ferioully, my dear friend, if you have been fo cloSe an obServer of the matrimonial Hate, it Should have been with a view tc reform it, and not

C 5
to
34
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
, to Ihrink from it; and depend lipon it, example is beyond every thing in that
• caSe.

I cannot agree with you that it is not fo happy a Hate as unmarried people in general believe. I think it by far the moft probable way to enjoy earthly happinefs, to enter into the connubial life, where two people are joined by mutual affedlion founded on efteem, with a full intention to exert all their powers of plealing to render each other blelfed.
Thought meeting thought, and will
preventing will.
With boundlefs confidence I for naught
but love
^.Dan anfwer love, and render blifs Secure.’^
When we find the cafe otherwife, believe me it is no fault of the married thite; but owing to the improper manner
.1
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 35
ner in which people generally form their connexions. When we See in-tereft the chief motive of their union, and the parties themfelves meet with the utmoft indilference, is it to be wondered that averSion and diSguft Ihould be the conSequence, and that k Ihould end in a miserable Separation?
I think our Englilli ladies oughtj of-all others, to Set the example of hap-pineSs in a .married life. The peculiar advantages we., enio.y in our laws and conllitution, Seem to point them out as proper objedls to Ihine in the do-rnellic circle. Let me tor a moment
I
transport you into Holland, where the beauteous female blots her fingers in the countin-g-houSe, .and bears the whole load of mercantile drudgery; can it be expected that She will Shine in the Softer Scenes of life?—Or, let me
convey
' I
A
3®
W R E A T H 0 F F R r E N- D S HIF.
convey to your imagination our more
polite neighbours, the Madames of
fit
The
females of theSe countries are too
\
little Subje.ft to the laws of reftridion
to make a, figure in private life
If too great confinement be the .fault
of Spain, the inhabitants of either fide
of the Alps Seem.to have fallen into the
oppofite extreme; tho’ liberty and free-
dom oSyriil be. defirable., yet too great
a licentioufneSs of manners is^ an error
ever to be avoided. T he liberty of
France, and the difiTokitenels of the
Italians, are extremes in condnft
equally un.favourable to kappinefs in
the married life.,—^England, however,
mayboaft greater things ; tho’ I am
af
raid in fome degree there is reafomto.
'think we have been too
•near neigh-
'boLirs to the F.reneh
genuine'
.f
WREATH OF FRI ENDSHIP.
37
Englilh ladies ( I 'mean thoSe vvhoSe manners and morals have never been corrupted by eroding the Channel between Dover and Calais ) poITeSs the happy medium in vain to be met with in other nations. Here, we See beauty, not (hut up in convents; here we behold virtue and Symmetry refle6l each-other. The females of England are too diScreettoneed reftraint; and in general have enough of livelinefs not to be deprelTed with every misfortune. The aiety of their hearts, which isthe effect of virtue and innocence, enli vens the thorny path of life. Smooths the rugged bed of care, and teaches their admiring country-men, that to be cheerful and happy, is to he good. Are'theSe fair nymphs devoted to the facred bands of wedlock We behold the lovely wife Soothing the hulband’s pain ; we fee the charming mother^ fmiling
upon
38 WREATH OF FRIEN-DSHIP.
upon her beauteous offspring whihl the enamoured Swaiir complexes the pleafing group, with looks of cordial Dw,.hanging over his thrice happy family.—TheSe are the' daughters of Britain I
But let me not be partial'; let me Subjoin. one word in behalf of manly virtue; where thoSe who rule have discretion, thoSe who obey will have no reafon to complain of oppreflion: ^tis the coward who is cruel, the brave are ever open and; generous. The fons of old England have, always been the fons of true courage;, and if our daughters have grown up under our hands like a flourifhing and beautiful fhrub, our hardy Ions have lifted up their heads to heaven,like a towering and magnificent oak,which by its ftrength proteSf s, and by its Ipreading branches fhelters
the
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
39
the tender Ihrub from every danger of the inclement Iky.
I think it is now high time that I Ihould put a flop to my diSquiSition upon the Subjedt; and if my arguments in favour of matrimony have not per-fuaded you to become one of that honourable fraternity, at leaft I hope, if ever again you hear me charged with levity or want of thought, you will do me the jullice to acknowledge that I have made observations on the world, and all things in it.—And that they have induced me, when a proper opportunity Ihall offer,to add one more to the number of happy couples.
Witnefs my Hand, Julia IIarcourts
f A
•• V •*
. . ; A

AO WREATH OF FRIENDSHm'.
LETTER V.
I ^
• Mrs. Seutiamore,to Klifs Darnley
MadraSy Odiober b, 1786,.
HE Seamen who navigate the fhips that convey my letters to^ you, are much obliged to our friendship; for I continually offer prayers for their .preservation, for fair winds,. Smooth Seas, and quick pafSages. I have every reaSon to believe, and hope, that my wifhes are propitious, as I hear of many of them arriving Safe, and Hill you receive very few of my remembrances. Who Ihall I accuSe then of this cruel negle6l? Not the winds or the waves, for they are very gallant; and were 1 a heathen, and
offered
S
\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 41
offered Sacrifices to Amphitrite, I could not pofTibly expert more attention than I receive. I mull complain then of thoSe fellifh men of bufinefs, who think of nothing but gain, and
r
look on letters as mere matters of form and no better than wafte paper; and never conhder the anxieties and eX’ pe6tations, andthoSe heart-achs which the lofs of them occafion. But do not imagine I have vanity enough to think my prayers are of So much avail;—^for if I do but call to mind the love and affedion every fliip is freighted with, I cannot wander they are in general So fortunat

I have received one pacquet from you lince I wrote lad, full of kindneSs and entertainment; it has tranfported me to England, and I am at this mo-iient Sitting with you in your dreffing-
room
t

.•!
u,.
42 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
room, talking ( in idea ) over every Subjed: from which we extracted pleasure in our younger days. I attend you to your green-houfe, your poultry yard, your Shady walks, and the banks of that charming rivulet which wafhes thofe hanging meadows, and winds fo fweetly thro’ your large domain. Here every thing is vaft and magnificent ! We can Shew you the Ganges or th-e Indus, but are Strangers to that little rippling current, which fo often beautifies the Britilh landfcape, and, as Dr. Byron fays,
“ Would dance in Soft murmurs thepeb-bles among..”
At another time, in a mild tranquil evening we walk to your village, where yon difpenSe health, and happineSs, and receive the blelfings and thanks of all your, dependants.:—How happy, compared to the generality of the pear
Sants,


%
A V
WREATH OF FRI ENDSHIP. 43
ianfs, are thoSe So depending; and how real' and how permanent is your happineSs drawn from fopurea Source! How preferable to the princely bondage we fuffer here 1^—where we cannot move without a train of poor wretches who tremble at a nod; and think a fmile a blefling of too high a value to be enjoyed by perfons whoSe lot is fervitude.—Poor creatures! I thank heaven, our domeftics have no Severity to accuSe us of; and I hope they are at lead as happy as we can make them in their preSent fituation.
I mud confeSs to you a great weak-neSs, that I am yet hardly reconciled to their complexion; but I endeavour to reaSon myfelf out of So abfurd a prejudice, by confidering, that if they had been born fubjeDs of Britain, it is pof-fible they might have poffelied fairer
fkins:
/
44 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
\
P
fhins; and, on the contrary, had I been a native of Indoftan, I might at this moment have been wetting the blinds of Some capricious beauty, who would cenSure or commend my offici-ouSneSs, as her humour direDed ; and perhaps reward me with a blow for my affiduity if fhe had no need for the fer-vice I was engaged in;
You, who are all benevolence and charity, can have no idea how your country-women treat theSe poor creatures ; who Suffer their tyranny for the
%•
fake of preSent Support, and bend beneath the yoke, in general, withcheer-SulneSs, and Ihow a faithfulneSs and honefty which perhaps Sometimes are not to be found in the breads of their mafters.— But you, who were always an enemy to Scandal, will Say, I grow cenSorious, and that, difliking the
country
WREATHOF FRIENDSHIP. 45
a
country, I cavil at every one in it; that I am indulging a habit of mind, always of rapid growth, which will unfit me both for my preSent Situation, and when I return to that dear Speck
the goal of all my
of the
globe
hopes and wifhes.
Scudamore has told me, that perhaps in another twelvemonth his affairs will be So far fettled as to allow us to leave India. How kind he is to give me this intelligence, and how rateful I feel for this proof of his affection!—Ifhufbands did but know how much they gain by giving to a wife ( whoSe intereft and happineSs is inseparable from theijr own ) their con-fidence, Surely they would never withhold So eaSy a method of conferring happineSs,
You
a6 wreathof friendship*

You alk my opinion of the world on this Side the waten whether it aboimdi with thofe vices, thoSe follies, and thofe crimes, which So debaSe and Spoil the one I have left?—Exaftly the fame, my dear Eliza! nor will you doubt it, when you conlider who are the perfons that form this Society. That they are men, wanting fortunes, and taking various methods to procure them; married to women chiefly adventurers, as mercenary as them-Selves; Some, perhaps, with liberal educations, and Some without any. But comparing the SmailneSs of this place to your vaft metropolis, I believe upon the whole we are quite as goodi and could I ceaSe to pine after thofe friends from whom I am Separated, and endeavour to look on the bright fide of the pidfure, 1 fhould often meet, not only with entertainment,
hut,
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 45?
f
but, what a leSs Serious mind than my own would call pleaSure.
The ladies here have no care about their houSes or their Samiliesy—I mean, they abound in So much plenty, that the wants of a family never prey upon the Spirits; and fine cloaths, fine equipages, and fine houSes, help to keep
up that gaity which takes pofleffion
■
of hearts at eaSe; neither filled with deep knowledge, or deep thought, and which are not much troubled with fenSibility. This makes the women lively companions, and the men, byaflbciatingSomuch with us, become attentive and polite.

We have concerts in a very good fiyle, ( in which I Sometimes take a part ) and dramatic performances by gentlemen and ladies above mediocrity;
h
; i 11
I
i» |!
1 i
it
. <
(. I i
\
i
fi
r
t
it 11
1
' *
48 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP^.
crity ; but of theSe I can be nothing more than a, Speftator, not havin confidence enough in my own abilities to venture to appear in So public a Situation. My hulband has attempted tragedy, and 1 believe, would he attend to the art, ahd give up Some time to it, he would probably Succeed; but he fays it is not his profeffion, and he leaves it to thoSe who have more time to throw away, and minds more inclined to light amufements.
Farewell, Eliza, my next will be conveyed to ybu by Mrs. DenniSon, rny lively Eleanor.—Do not forget to
4
make my remembrances to all my favourites, and to thofe who have not yet forgot your
Emily Scudamore.
LETTER
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
49
LETTER VI.
MiSs Courtney, to Lady Julia Hauourt
March g. .
PprelTed and bending beneath a load of grief, that at prefent almoft deprives me of fenSation, to whom ihall I unbofom myfelf, but to you, my Sympathizing Julia

Mrs. Gibfon, our dear Mrs.' Gibfon, is no more ! How will that Sentence wound your feeling heart! The friend of our early.years,—^^Ihe who pointed out to us the paths of virtue, is Snatched away by the cold hand of death! My agonies at this time are not to be described. She was Seized with a vi-

Voi. I
D
olent
»
I *
!;i
/: ;
’ i i
I -
r \
i! !
' { t
i
1 •
. 1 ! I •
I 1
i I
1 :
I I
50 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
olent fever, which in a few da)rs put a period to her valuable life; Ihe had fcarce any lucid intervals from the beginning of her disorder, till within a few moments of her death
As I was Standing weeping over her, Ihe looked a little more compofed, and fnatching my hand with the little remaining Ilrength flie had left, prcSs’d it to her lips, exclaiming, ‘^My child! my Selina ! who (hall comfort thee?” and foon after expired.You may judge of my fituation, I fell fenSeleSs on the door, and for Several hours all efforts to reftore me were ineffedual. But it was the will of heaven that I fhould not remain in that enviable ftate; I awoke once more, fully fenfible of all the horrors of my fituation.—Forlorn! difconfolate! wretched;!
Soon
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 51
Soon after this event Some diftant relations of my dear departed benefac-trefs came to take polTeffion of her houfe and eIFe£ls. But how unlike herfelf! One of them obferving me almoft Ilupified with grief, told me very plainly, that as he faw the Scenes around me only Served to heighten my diftrefs, I had better be packing up and, preparing for my departure. How his words pierced my foul! Whither Oiall I go, thought I, left alone, a miserable being in this wide world;
to whom fliall I apply for relief ? Early negleded-by my. parents, from from whom alone I had a claim for
s
protedion; now deprived by the flroke of heaven, of a friend who has been more than a parent to me,— What will become of me!
D 4
Oh!
I ’
• • » i \ i
HI
Ci
i i ’
ii
»» /
mI
i
fli
n
I
l!
‘ I
i ^
« ;
|i .
'!
!i
1 ;
I ; t )
i !
!i lii
Si
i!
Iw
! M
!!
ht it
i
1 * ']
ill
h:
i li
;|i
I.r r
i!i
.1 I
I
52 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Oh! my friend, how cutting is the refleclion that my own relations never enquire afterme!—-But let me not ralh-ly blame them,perhaps they have been, like myfelf, children of misfortune ^ and are now Struggling with all the hardihips of adverhty. Or, perhaps, fate has long fince put a period to their exiftence; and I, wretched out-caft!' am the only remaining branch of my miserable family.
But do not, my dear Julia, do not be too much diftrelTed for me; I have fortitude, and I truft, on this trying occalion, I can exert it. Reafon and refled ion will do much for me. Heaven, for its own wife purpofes, hath thought fit to afflid me; but I have this heartfelt fatisfad:ion, that there will never be laid upon the
children
ii
t ■; • « 4 \
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 53
children of affli(^lion, burthens heavier than they are able to bear.
To your dear mother I now apply, as the only Surviving friend I have, for counfel and advice. I know her goodnefs will prompt her to point out to me the beft method for my future plan of life. I think if any old lady wanted a companion to read to her,
i
that fpent a very retired life, it would be the moft eligible to my prefent turn of mind; for indeed, my dear friend, I am ill calculated for the bullle of -a jmblic life.—But whatever your mother thinks bed; for me, that I will, with all the cheerfulneSs in my power, purfue. I make no apology to you, my beloved friend, for thus pouring out before you the Sorrows of 3''our
Selina Courtney

U3
LETTER
: I
\
j
CM
ipi
lb-
IHi
• O' 1: > 11 ■
Hi
II!
!iii
c
is
I
M
:«
ill
! i f
' j • i
I i
i
t >
. * *
nw
ib
‘ 1
M
I « I
li
■ H

:.il
li
y ‘!

IC
|U-
!i . f
f » L
Tt'
HK
Mi
li
I: !,i
U!i i I'l'
f i
* •!'
n!j
I'm
‘ o
f
r «
'i!
I ii I
l!|i

n i
1M
Mi
1
It
ic H ^
ilt
:Ul ' T h
4 L L
mH
‘ O i
I:
i i
L ‘ . 1
: I J >. i
ir
tU I i
I : •:
'; 1
C 5
1- C , ;
•': I 1. ;
M
i. ;
; I
■ I i I t 1
O',
»i!


5‘4 WREATH OF F RT END SHI f..



L E T T E R Vn.
Latfy Julia liar court, to • MiSs^ JIamley.
T
JLA~
ivingston’‘Ahbey, March to.
Place juft received a letter from
my friend Selina Courtney, which
has rendered me unfit for any Society
but your’s, my Eliza; to you, I can.
with unreftrained confidence lay open
every feeling of - my heart. She in-
forms me of the death of our worthy
Mrs. Gibfon; a circumftance, which
would at any time have given me pain.
but the* peculiarity of my poor friend’s
fituation, muft make it So truly diS-
treffing to her, that I am. afraid her
Spirits, naturally weak, will be hardly
able to fuftain the fhock.
You
’ r
‘ \
%VREATH OF FRIENDSHIP,
9
You have often, I am Sure, heard me praiSe her for perSonal graces and mental accomplifliments; fhe certainly poffelTes both in a much more eminent degree than is in general the lot of human beings; and joins with them, a diSpoIition fo fweet,fo engagin g, that it is impoffible to know her, and notloveher. She was, when very young, brought to Mrs. Gibfon^s School to be educated, by a middle-aged, decent-looking woman, whom Selina at that time called the houfe-keep-er; but has now no recollecflion of, nei-ther can Ihe remember the place Ilie came from, or give any account of her family or friends. The deaths Ihe brought with her were expenlive; and feemed to denote profuSehefs in thoSe who had procured them for her. A large allowance was Sent regularly every quarter by an unknown hand ;
D 4
but

I i

■
1

r-

!l
i 1
> t
I
i
!l
f
11
lift
56 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
but after this woman left her,' no one

c ame to fee her.
One day as Mrs. Gibfon was look-
ing amongft her cloaths, flie perceiv-
ed afmall box; it contained a jewel of
grdat value, wrapped up in a piece of
white paper, in which thefe words
were written in. a female hand,
“ This jewel mull be conftantly worn
by Selina, as a token of remem-
brance from a dear friend, now for
ever loft to her.
yy
On my firft going to the fchool, the
ftridteft friendship commenced be-
tvreen us.
“ We have ftill Slept together ;
‘‘ Rofe at an inftant; learn’d, play’d,
eat, together;
And wherefoe’er we went, like
Juno’s Swans,
Still we went coupled and in-
separable.

I
/
WREATHOF FRIENDSHIP. 57
I now flatter myfelf this friendship will end but with our exillence.
About three years ago the remittances which had been before fo regularly fent, entirely ceafed. Mrs. Gib-fon carefully concealed this circum-ftance from the reft of the fchooL Soon after this, on account of her in-creafing age and infirmities, Ihe declined that fatiguing way of life; and took a Small houSe in a village about
f
twenty miles from hence. T hither Ihe retired, with MiSs Courtney for her companion, and they have lived together fince that time perfectly happy and contented.---Judge then, hovy much the lofs of this good v/oiuan will afliid my dear friend!
As foon as I had read her letter, and a little recovered my Self, 1 car-
D 5	lied
I
■ • I

! O =
(i 1
. t •
1 i!'
i!
II
i
i
I


•I

I!!
p
ii

|Ht
n|!
I’ll
|i!i
!l|H
!; 1
i!
i|U.
bf
iiii!
58 WREATH OF PR I END SHIT.
ried it to my mother. Ever awake to the impulfes of Senlibility, which in h^ arife, not only from a delicacy of feel-; ing> blit from the mor© folid motives of religion; Ihe readily joined with me in-dropping a tear to the'memory of an old friend. I rejoice, my Julia,’’ Said Ihe, ‘ ^ -that you will now have an opportunity of convincing Selina of the sincerity of your friendship; and have now-an afylum to offer her. I wilhgo with you myfelf to-morrow> to bring her here, and we-will.join our efforts to alleviate thofe diffreffes which at this time (he cannot but feel.”-—-
Oh! my
how thankfi^
ought I to be to Heaven for bleffing me with parents fo indulgent to all my wishes 1—May my heart be ever grateful to them for the daily proofs they give me of affedion; and
may
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 59
may I, by a return of kind attentions. Smooth their paflage through the vale of life. I have indulged in a recapitulation of pall Scenes, hill every C) e but mine is cloSed in balmy deep.
V
How ftill and Solemn is this mid-’ night Scene! Good night, my Eliza. That your guardian angel may hover round your pillow, and proted you from every Itroke of adverSe fortune,
Pfays, your % *
Julia Harcourt,
Lad.;
. r
• <
} 1! i I
I
1!
I •
iii
I \
If
I!
iff
i II
M M
’ ■ i j 111
ijin
lid!
i.
P!
!
to ' M' •
b!
it
t
is
U{
{
i I
b
i i
1!
Mi!
' • i I
Isti >!
6o
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Ladj/ Julia Harcourt in continuation.
I deferred fending you this letter hill I could give you the pleafing intelligence of Selina's being fafely lodged under this hofpitable roof.
My mother and myfelf went early yefterday morning for her; We found her i'n very low fpirits, and much af-fedfed at the fight of us; but my mother’s repeated alTurances of friendship and protection, feemed rather to revive her. I hope a little time fpent amongft friends that love her fo much will en-
'V
tirely reftore her. She is more lovely, more beautiful than ever. I am very defirous that you Iliould fee her, as I am fure you^ill admire her. Her liberal education has had the beft effed; and Ihe feems to have made the greateft
ufe
'!([ I
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP* 6l
uSe of thoSe excellent inftruDions which have been given her by her good tiitoreSs. Tho’ beautiful in a very high degree, Ihe has not the lead tincture of affectation ; her general behaviour is not So much to attraCl the admiration of others, as to confer hap-pinefs on all around her. You will readily believe what a lincere fatisfadion it is to me to have this friend con-ftantly with me; to partake of all my amuSements and entertainments. To
us who relide fo constantly in the
/
country, fhe will indeed be a valuable acquilition.
My father received her with all the
r
affection of a parent; called her his Second Julia, and Said Ihe might affure herSelf, that as long as he lived, Ihe Should never be in want of a comfortable home; and in return he would
make





I

62 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
/
make one requeft to her, that Ih.e would for the future endeavour to be cheerful and happy.—Selina dropped a tear of gratitude, but at that moment could not Speak.
•/
I am Summoned down flairs; our old neighbour, Lord Mordington, is come to dine with us, a bleffing we do not often enjoy; and if he feels himfelf as choleric as he did the lafl; time he was here, I am of opinion he would be better-at home.* He is expefting his fon from his travels every day ; if he refembles his father in his difpoli-tion, I pray heaven to keep him far from the prefence of your
J-ulla Harcourt.

V
t
LETTER.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 63
LETTER
VIII
Rev. Edward Seymour, to Henry
IIrummondy Efa.
March 28*
THANK you, my dear friend, for your congratulations. They found me at Wansford, about an hour after I had taken polfeffion of my living, which, I believe, will prove full five hundred a year.
When I came to W^sford, I found the late Redtor’s lady flill in the houle; and, as I hate to wound i a feeling mind, and the tears produced by af-flidion are more than 1 can bear, I helitated fome time, in what manner I
fhould
!


!l

{
ii >

II
!ill
r

r
I
64
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
Ihoiild proceed. So as to give poor
Mrs. Morton notice of my arrival,
without at the Same time reminding
her of the lofs (he had fuftained. I
found, however, that report had been
bufy ever fince my arrival, in convey-
ing the news from houfe to houfe, till
it had arrived at that which I was fo
afraid of dillreffing.
Whilft I fat at tea I received a mef
fage from the lady, defiring to fee me
0
I went immediately, and I think I
Ihall be the better for the vifit as long
as I live. Mrs. Mortonunfeigned
forrow, mixed with fuch a cheerful
refignation, has imprelTed itfelf fo
deeply on my mind, that I Ihall ever
refped her charader; and only wilh,
that in my miniftry, I may follow the
fteps of that holy man Ihe now laments.
His death is univcrially regretted
He
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 65
He might juflly be called the father of the afflicted ! To be in want, or Sorrow, were Sufficient recommendations to him. You will eafily believe how much I have been delighted with this account of him. You have often rallied me on my Serious turn of mind. I have Studied human nature with Some degree of attention, and have had too often reafon to regret the depraved State it'isnowin; you will allow me, therefore, to rejoice I have found one man, whofe memory alone is Sufficient to raiSe the moSt delightful emotions.
Tho’yoiJt temper and diSpoIition are both of a lively nature, yet I know you will pardon me for theSe ferious refledtions I will not how» ever trefpaSs upon you, but proceed on my ftory. After having taken
pof-
\
1
t \
i \
? . II
i ?
• f
t .
111 ii»
:
s h
lii!
ih
Ih
4 .
) •
Ml
il,
iii
i

( , I !
i!i f
1|M !{{ ■
!H i
:!i !
H
- * ‘
66 WREATH OF FRIENDSH IE.
poITeflion, I Supped with Mrs. Morton, and the Curate, whom fhe had obligingly invited. Mrs. Morton, told me that there was a houSe ready prepared for her in the village, to which fhe could remove the very next day. I begged her to continue where fhe was as much longer as was agreeable or convenient to herfelf; and to make her perfedly eafy, agreed to lodge with Mr. WatSon, ( the curate ) who Seems a modeft well-behaved man, and has a wife and family. At this place of residence I now am, and think I fliall remain Some time, as the the life of a Solitary bachelor is to me the moft uncomfortable Hate in the world.
i %
[ t
WatSon is a very agreeable companion, and his wife well-informed;
his children too youn g to be trouble-
Some,
i \
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 67
Some, and old enough to be very entertaining ; therefore, my friend, you muft come and See me where I now am. I Ihall not feel myfelf Satisfied till yon arrive; your friendihip has been the cordial that has given a relilh to every Scene, and has Smoothed thofe hours when every other amuSement Seemed to fail. I Ihall expedt you foon, for as your friendihip has been the comfort of all my pall years, it muft make a large part of what is to come, or the change will not be for the b’etter.
I have been bufy, preparing for Sunday ; you know my fears are not few, leaft I Should labour in the Vineyard in vain. However, I will do my beft; and what I am deficient in eloquence, I will endeavour to make up by example. I am pleaSed that fortune
has
t
1 t
II
II
ii

i ;
I

68 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
\
has placed me in a village, as here 1 Ihall have it in my power to be of more real uSe, than in a more exten-live lituation. Had I laboured ever So hard to reform the world, my labour would have been but vanity and folly; but in a Small circle, a taper will fend forth an agreeable ray of light: It is the fun alone that can Shed its benign influence on the whole globe.

I have Seen few of iny neighbours yet. The fituation is delightful; and as the country had always more charms for me than a life of folly and noifcj you will not wonder that I Sgn myfelf your contented friend,
Edward Seymour.
LETTER
. t
I

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 69
L E T T E R IX.
Lath ^ulia Harcourt, to MiSs Darnley
Levlngjlon Abbey, April 2.
OU are So lazy, my dear Eliza, that I am obliged to continue writing without waiting for your an-fwers; or I verily believe all inter-courSe would ceafe between us. Could I hear that you were on the point of marriage, and buSily employed in preparing bridal finery, I would try to forgive you; but dill to perfift in old maid-ifm, and live entirely by •yourfelf, without even writing to your friends, is an infult not to be borne. That love Iliould be the firft fubject of
;my pen this day, you muft not wonder,

70
WREATHOF FRIENDSHIP.
V	«
der, for, love, almighty love I is to be the only thing particularly confidered in this Iheet of paper. And that there can be no love without a lover, is very plain; therefore to him muft 1 dired your attention. But I will not hurry' you too precipitately into the gentleman’s acquaintance, you mull be introduced in proper form.
The finenefs of the weather yef*
day afternoon, tempted Selina and
\
myfelf, to ftrol into the garden. On our return we were informed that, Sir Robert Midford was in the drawingroom, a gentleman who has lately bought an ellate in this neighbourhood ; and having forne time ago a flight acquaintance with my father, had availed. himSeif of that circum-ftance, that he might enjoy a little fo-
t
ciety for the fhort time he was to ftay
in
t
y

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 71
• «
in this part of the country.—We immediately, Xik.t2i\\ young ladies, began to ‘Hatter oiirSelves he might be an agreeable man; and as beaux are not very common here, thought it would be the moll rational plan to join the company.
But how Ihall I give you an idea of the hero, that our imaginations had formed fo brilliant? he is very tall, and fo thin, that without you have Seen the ftarved apothecary in Romeo and
Juliet, you cannot imagine Such a Ike-
%'
leton.—His complexion is a bright beautiful olive, which, contrafted with the white powder in his nice peruke, has a Striking elFed. The whole call of his countenance, I have not the lead doubt, is fet at the glafs every morning before he emerges \ and the mod extraordinary occalion in the world,
would
7^ WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
would not tempt him to alter one
muScle.
His conversation is
as
formal as his perfon; and therefore Selina and I remained bufily employed in making flowers, without attending to what was going forward. But this, as you fliall hear in the fequel, turned to our advantage.
f i
r
t
\
1 !
When he took his leave, my father very politely Set him to the hall, where he turned round, and with the utmoft precifion addreffed him, “My Lord St. Clair, I have for Some time been making accurate observations on the female part of the creation, with a view to my future edablilhment in
life; my attention has hitherto been
0
fruitlcfs, as 1 never have met with a woman I thought worthy to become the partner of my joys. -~This afternoon I have obferved Something in
your
I ‘ t •
t
11
11
V
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
7'*
your daughter, which leads me to think fhe is the kind oi companion I wilh for; Ihe has happily blended the polilli of a polite education, with the fteadineSs of a country life; and if I can be fo fortunate as to gain your approbation, I have not tlife lead doubt of making mySelf acceptable to tfie
4
young lady.^’
My father enjoys a joke againfl; poor me too well, to let this go pad him j he therefore begged by all means he
would Speak to me himfelf, as it was
*
his determination neyer to bias my mind in the lead degree; and requeded he would breakfad with us the npxt morning, when he would undertake to give him an opportunity to make his own addreSs.-
Vol. I
E
^V-
> ou

Cv
74 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
You may fuppoSe what a very agreeable evening I had, in expe(5Iation of So formidable a liege. This morning about ten the beau arrived. Break-faft is at bell but a formal meal, but this was worfe than common; my father all the while enjoying himfelf fo mhch, I was afraid he would have
fcalded himfelf more than once with his
\
chocolate.—As foon as pofliblehe led out my mother, giving Selina a nod to follow them; but that I abfolutely prevented, by fiezing fo fall hold of her hand, that without flie had made a riot, fhe had no chance of efcaping. The worthy Baronet however was determined that fliould not prevent his intention, for he inftantly moved to a vacant feat by my fide; but looking full at me, 1 believe I looked chilling, and therefore he wifely confidered that
"f
love had better not be the firft fubjed.
He
WREATH OF FltTEirDSHIP. 7.5
He alked me with great deliberation, if I was fond of literature.	Literature,
Sir,’
^^yes, Madam, I mean as you lead a retired life, you mull Spend a great part of your time in reading, and confequently muSt be fond of - it.’* ‘‘No, indeed. Sir, I am not at all fond of it; but I can read, and f do read. Sir, for I read the morning papers every day; and that for a lady, and give me leave to add a lady of quality, is doing a great deal.”
“ I beg your pardon. Madam, then I preSume you are fond of the more polite amuSements of mulic and draw-
ing.”—“Yes, Sir, you are right, lam
as fond of polite amufements as any
; ^
body, but not mufic and drawing ; I fhould be very foiry to fit Scratching paper with a pencil all day long, or to be drumming at my harpfichord to
E 2
get
t *
I
i
I
I t
i I
il||
. I
i '
{
\ ^
I »
I'
hi
1:
j:' •
Hi I* V
‘ f *1
4
!!:i • « \
ii'i
lb;
n
1 ■

i i
!ij
ii
if
I!
II..
76 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
get the laft leffon my mafter Sent me, perfecft, againll he came to hear me play it. If I am to have muSic, let it be at the Abbey ; and then , there is Ipmething to pleaSe the eye as well as the ear. But the amuSements I like beft, are routs, balls, plays, maSque-radesl —Oh! how much I Should like to be out all night at a maSquerade ! to fay every thing I chofe, and to hear every thing the company chofe to fay to me, —I cannot fuppofe any thing more charming!

s
I am forry to find. Madam, that I have been a little deceived in your charader.*^—If you have been deceived, Sir, I am Sorry for it too, but give me leave to tell you, if you have been con veiling in this neighbourhood, it is no wonder you are deceived; 'for they are a fet of bafe, narrow-!minded,
'malicious,
t
; I
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP

7^ /
malicious people, and no doubt would tell you that I was a poor, mean-fpi-riied, pitiful creature, and could take ^ no pleaSure in the joys of a town life. But allow me to Set you right. Sir, nobody could enjoy gaiety more tlian mySelS; and if I was not kept here by reftraint, I would live in a conftant racket.^^ ‘.Don’t miftake me. Madam,
I do not mean that any one has miSre-preSented your charafler to me, but that from my own observation of your behaviour yefterday, I took you to be “ meek, modell,”
“ Meek and modeft!” interrupting him “and pray. Sir, has any thing in my conduct this morning given you a right to alter your opinion? Do you mean to infinuate that I am paffionate and impudent! That is an inSult not
Far be it from me.
to be borne.
E 3
Lady
ii
k
I i
III
il!
. I
• i
l‘
.« 1 . i
!1
il
U
: •

a
I!
HI

,|i! lii
t .
Il
Mi
ii:
!l !
ifi
ii=-
!ii!
Iii!=
It
i!li
ilH
IMl
lib
II.-1 i!-
!i

I I > i
f ^ 1 •
1' '
i!Si I ■[

!
i!
I If
? r <
II!
■. i
l‘i
I * * I «
' ♦
‘lb
■yii
7S WRfATH.OF FRIENDSHIP.
\
Lady Julia, to wilh to inSult you ; but
as we Seem, to miSunderftand one
another entirely, and as the SabjeA I
wiflied to have Spoken upon will be
now unnecelfary, I will, with your
leave break up the conference.

I
readily agreed to this propofal, and
the gentleman making a very fine
bow to us, withdrew ; fully convinced,
that there is not one woman in the
world that has a grain of diScre
Selina was quite fhocked at my me-
thod of treating lovers;, but I quieted
her confcience as well as I could, and
we joined my father and mother in the
garden, where I was obliged to inform 1 them of what had palled, to account
for the gentleman’s hafty departure.
My father laughed exceedingly, my
mother
<. I ’
o i ■
i:-i. • i •
1! •
Tr-\
l» ■ ItT
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 79
4
mother Ihook her head, and looked
«
a world of reproaches; all. that, however, I was obliged to bear, as I certainly deServed it. But depend upon it, however flighty I may be to the beaux, I am always fteady in friendihip, and will ever remain.
Your afle(5lionatc

Julia Harcovri.

4
LETTER
-1
II
'; •
I h
u
‘ }
So WREATH OF FRIRNPSHIP
LET TER
X.
to the Rey.
Edward, Seymour,
JVeJihury-Lodge, April 8.
Rejoice, my dear'Edward, to hear
you are fo well Satisfied with the
lituation of your benefice. I will cer-
tainly come and See you, as you fay it
will be no inconvenience to the family
at whoSe houle you refide. I have no
objedion to be the gueft of a country
parSon; their wives generally make
good puddings, and the hufband is
often a cheerful companion.
I like the account you give me of the
late incumbent’s widow,and the reflec-
tions
i!!
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 8l
i
tions thereunto belonging; but don’t let your enthufiaSm for the memory of your predecelTor, carry you quite fo far as it once did an acquaintance of mine, who, on taking poffeflion of a living in the ftyle you have done, found the widow in the fame predicament; and to prove to the world his admiration for the character of her firll hufband, married the relid, who was as old as his mother, and without a Ihilling but a
4
fmall life annuity. She did him the honour to live many years, to convince him of her gratitude, and to give him an opportunity of every day “ feeding the hungry and cloathing the naked/* which offices he performed for her fome time beforeJhe, or rather he was releafed : lince which period he has
never dared to enter into another en-
%
gagement. But perhaps was he to hear
of Dr. Morton’s fame,.ajpid his widow’s
.	Sorrow L
1 I
n
i i
;i 1
' i

• I ,
.\ I
■ 1 I
}i ■ '
,1
I
!ii
l! !
* • i
ib
i‘ 1
b»!
;r
*: «
F •
hi' 1''
!:h
' t !
»‘l ‘
‘I,
: i'
'iii
§2 WREATH or FRIENDSHIP.
Sorrow, he might Hep forth as your rival, and her comforter, and the champion of all worthy divines departed this life*..
I am in a better humour with my uncle than when I wrote laft,. the reason I believe is, his being in better humour with me; and Wellbury would cajiu the very devil. himSelf; he has So much of the milk of human kindneSs
j	■
in his compoIition> and is the properefl
*
perSon in the wprld. to live with,, his churlifli father..
I f :
IT,
Yefterday we dined at Lord St.. Clair’s, who had waited on Lord Wellbury. the day after his arrival, and requefted we might begood neigh--bours—and “you my lord,” Said he to-my uncle, ^^will I hope now enter into^ the Society of the neighbourhood, and
be
ii'i

Ij:!'
Li;
iu'
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
3
be as gay as the reft of us ?
9}
CC
Not I,
indeed, I cannot vilit. Sir, I have got the gout, and that is not an agreeable gueft to carry abroad with one. Be-lides. Sir, your girl is a giggling girl, and I don’t likefuch; they don’t Suit an old man; they laugh at his infirmities, and ridicule his dreSs and his peculiarities ; not confidering they are far worSe themSelves. BeSides, I can-
not talk nonSenSe to ladies now.
»> i{
But
the young men can, my lord, and I will take care to entertain you, and leave thejouths to chance.”— ‘‘Well, St.dairj I will try this once, and if I don’t like this vilit I’ll come no more;
I
mind that, I won’t be teaSed.” —Lord St. Clair acquieSced in this determination, and yefterday was the. day
fixed..
It;

il



> • '

S4 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
It is amazing to me, how all the people of this place yield to the peculiar dilpofition of this odd mortal, and take all his pettilhncfs in good part. What a time his poor wife mull have had, who, I am told, was extremely amiable; all gentlenefs and affability; and who is Hill fincerely lamented by her Son, who inherits her virtues, and is Said to be very like her in perfon as well as mind.
But where am I rambling ? I meant to give you an account of our vifit, which, till the moment I fat down to write has been the only fubjedl I have cither talked of, or thought upon. Wonderful, you will fay, that Harry Driimmond could dwell upon any one fubjed for twenty four hours! But this is really the cafe; and I have an idea that I am beginning to grow
wife.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
O
wiSe. You will be very glad to l.ear it, I know, but, my friend, it is the charms of Lady Julia Harcourt that have for fo long a time fixed my attention. Her gaiety, her wit, and her elegance, had almoft quite obliterated every trace of poor Rofalia; who,
with the word matrimony in her hand,
1
palled by my imagination and reflored me to myfelf, but not to tranquility. How ridiculous are our juvenile attachments, and how much I lament the forming one that I fear Hands in the way of all my hopes and all my preferment. I have filled my paper fo elfedlually, I believe, I mull be obliged to give you a fnetch of our vifit another day; befides, we are going to ride out, in hopes !—Ye hopes of meeting Lady Julia, and her beautiful friend, Mifs Courtney.
Adieu!
St
in

■J
1
86
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP

Adieu! I am ever your’s* Let me hear from you foon. You know I like nothing So well as your letters,-—except your very felf.^
4
Henry Drummond.
LETTER XI
9
Mifs Darnle^, to Lady Julia Harcourt
i
JVansford-Koufey April 5,
YOU fhall not a Second time, my
friend, chide me for being idle. I have received both your favours, which, are fo,very unlike each other,
V
that had I not known your writing, I might eafily. have miftaken you for a new correspondents
Your,'
1
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 87
Your amiable Sympathy for MiSs Courtney’s Sufferings Shews your character in the true light. Your flights of fancy exercifed on poor Sir Robert, were fair, I think; as he was properly punilhed for fuppofing he had. penetration enough to fee your character in couple of hours, when I Scarce underftand it, who have ftudied you iocyears. You lay I am unfociable, and wilt neither vifit you nor write; believe me I Should have infinite plea? Sure in doing, both...
I have had Mrs. Morton with me for Some days pall; Ihe is now gone to her own houfe, and this neighbourhood has got the acquifition of a very amiable young clergyman ; he pleafed both the grave and gay on Sunday. Unfortunately for me, I had a cold, and was, obliged to be confined at
home:
1 i
; 1
I t
. I
! I
i I
i
i i
li
•»
’ r
il
1!
t;
! '

f
:i
ill
*• I
: I
U '
T
I »
1
!!
H

l!!1



88
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
home; but I had the pleaSure of Seeing
him yefterday*
The day being fine, I walked down
to enquire after Mrs. Morton’s health,
in her new houSe; when I entered, flie
faid “ my dear MiSs Darnley, I am re-
joiced you are come, as I expert Mr.
Seymour to tea, and 1 wifli fincerely to
have you introduced to him, as I think
he is the man alone who can make
you happy.” I Smiled at the good old
lady’s earnefbneSs, but aflured her I
m
could not Stay tea, as I found my cold
very indifferent; and as to any hap
ptineSs Mr. Seymour could afford me
5
I was certain Ihe was miftaken, as I
had reSolved never to alter my fitua
tion.
Whilfl we were debating as ufuaL
this fubjeft, the Servant announced
Mr
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 89
Mr. Seymour. I confeSs I felt alhamed, though I knew not why. His addreSs was polite, and my worthy friend introduced me with fo many encomiums, that I moll heartily wiShed mySelf elSewhere. I know, Julia, your (uriofity to have a description of this gentleman will be great; had I your lively pen I might do him juftice; but as it is, your own imagination muft aflill me.—Mull I begin with his per-fon ? without doubt, as I Surely cannot judge of his mind in one afternoon, for Julia I did flay—out of mere cu-riojlty.
He is above the middle lize, and %ell made; has a dark complexion, with the finest eyes I ever Saw; they convey an exprefiion of goodneSs in every glance; his teeth are white and regular, and his tout mfetnhle jufl what
I
f
1
1
I
1" • i
I !
li
l!‘
i
t
!h} 1 !
• '
u 1
i 1
{ :
«r »
00	WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
1	would wifli in a brother. The eon-verSation was at firft So very grave and languid, that I repented Several times that I had flayed; however, as we became better acquainted, it took a more animated turn, and when I looked at my watch I found nine o^clock was approaching fall. I had not ordered the coach, therefore was obliged to accept Mr. Seymour's offer of attending me home.
He declined going in with me, but begged I would allow him the honour of calling the next morning to enquire after my health. He came as I ex-pe(5led, and fat a couple of hours. He wilhed much to be admitted a member of our reading Society, but I af-fured him it was impoffible, as we had refuSed to admit the hufbands of thoSe ladies who were members, and he had
not
6
WREATHOF FRIENDSHIP* 91
;iot So good a right to expe<ft indulgence; he Smiled and replied, tho* he had not the happinefe of being a hufband at preSent, it was the firft wilh of his heart to meet with a lady, who, with the requilites to make a matrimonial plan delightful, had the inclination to make him a hulband. I told him he had better retain thofe ideas of the married life, but never attempt to realize them, as he would lofe the ideal blifs perhaps in real mifery. He begged I would allow him to point out to me the numberlefs comforts attending a connexion, where two hearts were united in the Soft bond of Sympathy and love.—‘‘It would be giving yourfelf, Mr. Seymour, trouble, and be attended with little fuccefs, therefore, if you pleafe we will call a new fubjeSl! I am to have Some of my neighbours to tea and Supper this
evemn
5

1 I
’ii
I ((
't:
tl!
[
11
M 1

02
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
evening, if you will join the party wc will endeavour to convince you it is poITible to be extremely happy, and yet not married.
But, my dear Julia, I am fure your patience mufl have Suffered; and as I have to dreSs to receive my friends, -1 will releafe you, only beSpeak me a place in your Selina^s heart.—I have fome expedlation of going to London foon, as I expedt a friend of my dear Mrs. Scudamore’s will arrive in England, and when fhe comes I muft fee her. Write to me every moment you have to Spare, as every thing you do, or fay, is interefting to the heart of your
Eliza Darn ley.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
93
LETTER Xir
umrnond, Pfq. to Edward Sevmour.
PVeJibury-Lodgey April IF
>
Write to you always with pleafure, my dear Seymour, but never with more than at this moment; becauSe I never had So agreeable a Subjed to expatiate upon. .Lady Julia is forever the burthen of my fong; neither mvft yon be furprized, or find fault, if I talk to you of nothing elSe. 1 mujl Speak of her to Somebody, and to
m
Weftbury I dare not, for fear of making him my rival; for tho^ I hope for nothing but her friendihip, I feel all the anxieties and jealoufies of a lover.	‘
Ocr
w I

e \	/
!: ?
Is :
u.
Ill !
.iiih ■
bii:.

t
b; '■
LL i *U.
i h \
I'i.
rl
jiil !
■ b' I lii.b *
li 'i!i
il
iiiil!
■!
r '
• i •
iM
jb 1
il !i 1 ihji. 1
M 1
I
if *
!'l •
j
.lil 1 11
U'
I'P
lie '■
1 b I • I I'i*: 1
I'M 1
iii:' ^
l!'l •
n
lill
ib' ^
i!‘i:
It
<< 1 ■
• .11
i!b ,
!i;:f ‘
r*h ■
hi
!!.■
t‘ .
i’l'
!»1.
1* '
iil
lili
I) ti
II' I

'hi
!!'
ih" 11 i
i ><
b-
III!
(I
iisi
:!i il
ii:
id
I*' .
Mi ^
ili:

iMl! :; I •
u
[lii:
i!- .
il*
94
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Our old lord behaved better than 1
expedted on our lirft vilit, tho’ not
quite To well as I could have wilhed.
But Lady Julia has fince So efFedtually
won his heart, that he is now quite
tame, and is never So happy as when
we are with the family. He could not
poffibly take a more eaSy method of
pleafing us, forWeftbury Seems quite
as ready as mySelf to indulge him upon
this head.

The firft day w« were at Lord St.

Clair’s, after having fat a while, and
talked over the ftate of the weather (the
firft fubjedl in all Englilh parties) poli-
tics Succeeded, and Lord Mordington,
who is ever defpairing, complained
heavily of the deplorable ftate of the
nation, and how near we were to a ge-^-
neral bankruptcy. Juft at this moment,
Lady Julia, to whom I had literally
bedn
!!!ir .
iliL :
' t •
! f
t!!'
Ill :
WREATH OF FRI ENDSHIP. 95
been talking nonSenSe, happened to
laugh,
“ There, my Lord,’’ Said
my uncle, you See even the Serious ftate we are in at preSent, and the melancholy conSequences likely to enSue, cannot for a moment check the risibility of your daughter.” “Why, Surely, my dear lord, you would not have me anticipate evils?” “Certainly,Madam, I would, — ’tisonly by living irt fear, we have any chance of avoiding danger; and take my advice, fair lady, and even in love affairs which are your politics, always think a man a Seducer ’till the ring is on your finger. There’s Weftbury himSelf, I would not truft him in thcfe matters, tho’ 1 believe he is one of the bell of them”.——— “ Oh!” Said Lady Julia, laughing.
I believe he is a very tyrant.
>> ((
No,
madam, he is no tyrant, he is one of the very belt young men in the world,
and
li

I f
ill
L
( !
!l
>' 1
it
1 I
t ^
1 .
I
ii!
\
‘ I '
I:
► •
n
H:
I •
II
I»
I :•
‘‘i

■ i «»‘
i;

i
li ! >
i i!
I
r
il
I. ■ 1
M
*
t < . »

96 WREATH or FRIENDSHIP.
and I wifli you had juft juft Such ano
ther for a hufband.—I don’t chooSe he
fhould marry yet, So don’t you Seduce
in your turn.” ' I cry you mercy! my
lord, but I make no promiSes, So take
m
my hand and let us go down to dinner!”
which was at that moment announced,
and my tefty uncle was blefled with
the fair hand of her ladyfhip to the
dining room. But juft on entering
the door, another cauSe of vexation
occurred, for the two fair friends
t
coming very near, the feathers in one
hat, and the .flowers in the othfer be*
came entangled, and lady St. Clair
was called to Set them at liberty.
Mordin
O
on the preSent falhions, on their ab
furdities, their inconveniences, and a
thouSand &c’s. He told the ladies
how much more beautiful they would
have
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
have looked drelSed in the mode their grandmothers followed, who wore pretty little fly caps, with long lappets^ and a handkerchief laid cloSe to their boSoms. Lady Julia made no reply, but was very attentive to his description, and looked very arch, as if She thought more than met the card*

The ladies fat longer than uSliai after dinner, to my great joy, for not being a votary of Bacchus, I always lament their departure ; and detell
the conversation that uSually follows it,
^ \
VVteScbury and I Soon claimed the privilege of going to talk nonSenSe in the drawing-room, and left the old lords to fettle the affairs of the nation.
Nothing could. be more animated
f
than the conversation of the ladies*. Lady St. Clair is cheerful, well-in-
Vol. I
"• I
F
informed
) I
I
I!
II
l{
lb
I I
}
t; '
ll) !
ii
98 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP,
formed, and delirous of feeing every one eafy and happy in her preSence; and Lady Julia ! how can I deScribe the charms of her wit, or the luftre of her eyes ? how artleSs and innocent, yet how gay and lively ! and how pleafantly Ilie feems to fport with every fubjedt.
Weftbury alked me on our road home, if I thought her handSome ?
I protest, my Lord, I never once thought about her face; if (he is not fo, I have not discover’d one failing feature ; and if She is, the beauties of her mind entirely eclipfed thoSe, of
her perSon.
yy

A very pretty jeSu-
itical anSwer; but I perceive by it, that it is the tout enfemhle you admire. I think her very pleaSant for an hour or two ; but her Spirits are fo good, th^t I have no idea they can always
remain
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.' 99
remain the fame. MiSs Courtney Seems to me to have the more equal
temper
May be So, but Ihe is So grave, I am certain I {hall never be better acquainted with her than I am at preSent.”
We have met theSe two friends al-moft every morning ; having talked of riding, and finding it a favourite exerciSe of the ladies, '^ve Tpoke of the prettiefl; rides, and by that means found out thoSe they moft frequented ; and by going acddentally that way, have ever been So fortunate as to
V
meet them, and we are now upon the moft agreeable terms of friendship
and familiarity.
Our viSit was 'returned before the end of the week, but gueSs our Surprize, on handing the ladies out of
F 2
th

U f

I
ill
Mit
il
j}
3
II
ii
I!
It
I -
ii
11
I'ii
I.lM
Hi:
$
.ii
si; .

H’
m
M
:: i
id-
lli!!
khi
pt'
iiv h
i‘ te
Hi
ill
ssli
I
E I
i
Jfi
mi
• L
Hi
I,
I bT
Hb’S
t|
■^i
Mi:
Ii
:p
I
Jhii
ifj]
51
llii
< I }.•
M rt
lU
ill:
ii'i
Mllj ■ 11!
l!
. >
fi
lii!
i'lH
i'i-
!!i[
■i'l*
'I !;
i •'(
t' o
hti
w % j' •
■■'« ?
•itb
iiifi!
Hth!
IMH
Mill
II b;
SQO ’WREATH OF FRTENCSHiT
sthe carriage, to fee Lady Julia drelTed exactly in the ftyle of her grand-mo* <ther, as defcribed by my unde. It was impollible the could diSguiSe her-Self; but equally impoffible to forbear laughing at the contraft between her-■felf and Mifs Courtney, who was perfedly elegant in the preSent tafle. Lord Mordington took it as the highest compliment, and has abfo* lutely been in good humour ever Since 5 and Lady Julia bleSTed herfelf for having been the caufe of it.
Adieu, I Shall write all night at this rate, would my paper but allow me; but I have only room left to fubfcribe myfelf.
Your very afFedionate,
II. Drummond.
• • '!r
ii
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. lOI
LETTER XIII.
Rev, Edward Seymour.) to Henry Drummond, Efq.
JVamford, April 30.
Thank you, Drummpnd, for your caution, it was friendly, and I hope I Ihall profit by it; but poor Mrs. Morton is too fincere a mourner, for me to have pleafure even in your trifling on this fubjeft.
I have been now a,month in my parilh, and therefore can Speak with fome degree of certainty of the comforts I experience, and the politenefs of the neighbourhood.
F 3
There
102 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
t
*	I
P
ini
li
There are only three families in the
beSides that I am with. The I Shall mention is a Mr. Har-who' has his eftate of about
grave,
£.400 a year in his own hands, and
0
therefore may be called a gentle-
man-farmer
; he has an agreeable wife and fcveral children. The other two are Mrs. Moreton’s, and a particular friend of her’s, a maiden lady, who lives by herfelf upon a Small fortune, and is blelfed with the love and admiration of all who know her, for her many amiable qualifications.
About a quarter of a mile from the town Hands a neat modern-built houSe, whoSe owmer’s name is MiSs Darnley. , It would be a difficult talk to give you a description of this charming young lady. She is her own- miftrefs, and has been fo for four
or
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I03
or five years ; and tho’ flie has had a variety of lovers, (he has refuSed them all, and fteadily declares fhe will never marry. She is a bleffing to the whole neighbourhood ; flie relieves the wants of the poor, and comforts the afflided; wherever Hie appears the prayers of all beholders follow her, and yet Ilie is unaffeded, polite, and affable.
After this defcription you will begin to feel fome apprehenfions for your friend; in truth, Drummond, had I the lead hope to build upon, I Should confefs myfelf in love. I know you will laugh at me, but do your word, the amiable Eliza has' convinced me I had a heart to lofe. I have Spent much time with- her fince I came, and always met with a polite reception, but it is that of a perSon who is never

F4
to
I
i} ) >
I,
!'j
1i

0
I
in
104 WREATH OF FRIENDSHlPv
to be more than a vifitor. It is with Some degree of reftraint,- and keeping a conftant guard over all any words and aflions, that I conceal my attachment to her.
I was reading prayers the other morning, and She came into church after 1 had begun* and would you believe it, Drummond, I made a full pauSe, and. am fure for a minute could not find out the place where I fbould be. I felt fo afhamed at this weak-nefs, which appeared to me much beneath a man of my profeflion, that I never call my eye towards her the- remainder of the Service.
When
I went into the veftry till the congre-ation were all gone ; you will believe I felt a little conScious. MiSs
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP, I05
Darnley’s Servant came to me, and Said his miftreSs wanted to Speak to me. I haftened to her ; flic begged my pardon Sor Sending Sor me, but She had a petition to preSent ; it was Srom my gardener, whomd had discharged Sor ill behaviour. • She Said Ihe could plead little in his' favour,' but that he had a wife and
y	•
large family who would be destitute. The man himSelf had promiled to be-
4
have better if i would forgive him.
You may be lure'I indailtly complied with her requeft, and handing her to hercarriageV which was waiting, =I added, I Should have been extremely happy, if She would as= readily have granted my'firft requeft. • Had it been in her power, Ihe faidj I fliould not have repeated it twice. •

Xou
I06 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP,
*
You may remember the requeft;! told you was to be admitted a member of a. reading Society, which is held at her houSe once, a week. The
I
books are hiftory. and poetry, and oc? caSionally. a French novel, but they arc never allowed one in Engliih. No ,bad plan this to join. improvement with entertainment.
I had a great defire to <makd one of fo agreeable party, and MiSs Darnley is the only member who ob-jeds to this. propoSal. , I told her if file would admit me I would read aloud to them at all times, and never make my appearance till tea, and withdraw before Supper. She Smiled at my propofition, and Said, if it were in their power to allow me to become a member, I. Iliould not be excluded at any hour ; and that flie
had
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I07
had no doubt but I Should be an agreeable addition to their Society.
I Stepped after her into the coach, and as I fancied She began to relent, I continued to urge her; Are you,' my dear MiSs Darnley, determined equally to refill all importunities from the gentlemen ? You can be happy, it Seems, without their Society ; but charity Should induce, you to extend your ideas a little beyond felf,
r-
and ■ relied: how much you maku them Suffer.’’ Flattery will not do, Mr. Seymour; I do not boaSt of any power over your Sex; neither do I wifh Sor any.”.
By this time we had reached WanS-ford-HouSe, when, as the coach drove to the door, (he Said, I Sancy you are not to be told, this is the day on
which
IO.^	W R E A T-H O F F RT E N DSH 2^


%
■which we hold our meeting,, whiclii mull be, my apology for not requeflin
t
your company . Before I had time to -reply, the Servant told her there were.-fome. Ladies and Gentlemen come to-dine with her from the next market* town ; fhe then Laidturning to me,
I will entreat in my turn that I may be favoured with your company, as L * fliall fend an excufe to my friends att Wansfordd^ '
L accepted the invitation, andJ hayed till eleven o’clock, when L walked home in^a very rainy night,;:,
but I felt it not; Eliza engaged every
thought and every feeling.. I am at -prefent however far from well, the .^ ' agitation of my mind, indiSpoIition I cannot Shake off, ren^ ders me unfit for any company. Ii have not left my room to day, and;
thi&
to an

Lf
w. R E A T IT o F F RI ENDS H I P.
ro^
this letter has been written at Several
(
intervals..
r-
4.
A violent Head-ach obliges me now-to lay down my>pen. Let me hear-from yon 1 Soon. You know how much I admire Wellburyb charadter, . therefore -kt him often be the fubjedl: S’of your pen^ and fometimes your :
ia. If you are iiv.> love,. you. de^^,-krve the pity of your
EKivard Seymour^ -.

1 ^
LETT

no WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
LETTER XIV.
Henry Prwmmond, Efq. to the Rev.
Edward Seymour*
Wejibury-Lodgei May 4,
ttJT is a folly to be wiSe at all
of my
times.
This
IS one
maxinis, and a very favourite one too ; it muSt therefore be my exciiSe for the joke about the widow, which I foe you did not reliSh: But I hope you
ixie jultice to allow, that

will do
thoM caji {ometimes jejj I can alSo feel. So far, fo good,—-and now to that fubje(fl which is tee fumtaum
s.
bonum of life ; the ruling principle in. my breaft, I freely confeSs, and it
Seems

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. Ill
Seems to have taken pretty faft hold
%
of youKs.
I heartily wifli you SucceSs with your fair inSenfible ; you are a hand-fome fellow, and have fuch a winning addreSs, (as my old Aunt ufed to tell you,) that I don’t thinL you need defpair. You do want a littlo of my confidence to be . Sure, but perhaps a real paflion may infpire you with that; only r beg you wont fall fick, for I have no idea how a woman can like. 2if>uny lover.,
Mercy on me ! here have I writtea almofl: a , whole fide of paper, and don’t fee the word Julia in any one line ; yet that, is a word that, arrefts my eyes, my ears, my heart, and my, understanding, if . ever fo faintly ex-=
Certainly fh‘e is , the .mod
charmin


l-
ir
112 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
charming woman in the world. We carry on a very confiderable flirtation, Kfi in jefi, and only to plague that coxcomb Selwin, who is at the Abbey, and is her relation it Seems, and who, I believe, fancies himSelf in love, but he miftakes the objebl. . I could let him into thb Secret, would he conSult me, and tell him at once, that the objed; of attention is his own fweet yry,; and not .his. incomparablej coufin. .

Blit he loves Ihew and parade, and i as her fortune will be large, no won- -der it fliould attrad fo. frivolous a i mind as his.. Now I ’declare .to you, ,
her withouta -her heart, ,
that I
farthing, , could I
gam
(that inestimable treafure) and were I at liberty and free to chufe. Alas! that, juvenile indiScretion ! how clofe
It
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. II?
it Hicks; and how perpetually does it preSent itSelf, and damp my hap-pieft moment!
I dare fay Lady Julia muff think me a ftrange mortal; for when I am in my higheft fpirits, when I am gazing at her with rapture, this horrid thought, like a gorgon^s head,,
comes and turns me into ftone. I fit
%
for fome moments inSenfible to every
; hill a kind word from her roiiSes and brings me back to life, and, (whilst I can banilli this phan-
to bliSs, which £hc only can befiow.
I believe we did not profefs to be lovers when I wrote to you laft, but as I love talking, I will tell you the prelude to it. You will Say I write like a. boarding-School mil's to her confi-^

w
ii;
iH
; ✓
r
i!
114 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
dant; but whether you read or not,
I mull write on. You know I always
follow the impulSe of the moment;
no great wifdom this I own, but that
is a qualification of which I cannot
boaft! but you may teach it me if
you can, it may perhaps Save me Some
heart-achs, and the Sooner you Set
about it the better.
We were fitting one morning in
o	o
Lady Julia’s drefling room, the uSual
partie quarree, MiSs Courtney, Lady
Julia, Weftbury, and mySelf; the Sub*
jedt was love, and each had given a
description of the fort of nymph or
fwain mofl approved, And what
fort of a mortal is doomed to wear
your chains. Lady Julia ?

‘Why,
Something out of the common track,
I affure you. He mull not be a cie
fpairing lover, but in general gay and
airy;
L
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 11^
airy; never li gh in my preSence but by mere accident; never talk of dyings becauSe if I really liked him it would be cruel; and if I did not, I fhould
4
not care a firaw whether he lived or died. Then he mull not be too attentive, or deprive me of the ufe of my limbs by anticipating my very
wilhes. I would not have him come
#
the length of a room, for inllance, to take up my fcilTars ; nor run againfl: me out of politenefs, when I rife to ring the bell. Not to fondle and teaSe my dog out of affedion to its millreSs. Then I would not have him come So near as to tread upon my apron, for I hate dirt. He muft not continually tell me that I am as beautiful as an angel, becauSe, as I look in the glaSs every time I come near
am quite as SenSible of that as himSelf, He muft Sometimes con-
one, I
ti

V

Il6 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
tradid me, which, if we often cor
verfe will be iieceSSaryj Rs I boaft of
no infallibility of judgment; and I
fliould hate Servility in a man who
profeffed himfelf dehroiis of pieaSing
me. Thefe are a few traits of the fort
of lover I Ihould like.
‘‘ Ah ! could I but find,,
** I care not for riches
V-*
A man to my mind !’*
ti
But his perfon ftill remains to
be drawn ! I am mighty indifferent
about that, only I Should dioofehim
to walk ered ; to have two eyes, and
thofe dark and expreffive; and his
teeth ^ven and white; and as to the
reft, Selina, you may finilhthe picture
if you pleafe
52
^ Not I, indeed,*'* and She looked
at her with an archnefs I thought her
Lnsapable of,
\yhich brought the
\
WRtATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
n;
<1
colour into
Julia’s face; and
of which fhe feemed fo confcious, that fhedidnotlook up forfome moments.'
The Silence was at laft broke by your humble Servant, ^ I declare to you, Lady Julia, I believe I could accommodate mySelf to the iketch you have drawn, would you but take me upon trial \ and if in a fortnight 1 don’t prove quite to your wifh, difcard me as not worth farther pains. As to perfon I cannot be a judge my Self, whether I am quite as you wifh or not, I have tivo eyes ’tis true, but whether expreffive or not, you, ladies, mull determine, and love alone can add that grace.”
Take him at his word, Lady Julia, Said Wellbury, he is an odd mortal, and may afford you Some entertainment ;
ii
I ; i t
i i
-L
J I
I I
t I
i! k
I
:
I
Il8 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
tertainment; behdcs, it will be cha
w
rity to give him Some employment.”
‘ I vow I donh know but 1 may ac
cept of him, it will'be convenient
enough at this j undure, when Selwyn
is coming with a fixed defign of Heal
ing my heart; but take notice his all
in jeft, for I would not be rea/Iy in
love for a thouSand worlds.
<(
Agreed,
my fair enfiaver, and now take no
tice, MiSs Courtney, that Lady Julia
from this moment allows me to make
love to her whenever I am in the hu
rnour.
»
C6
No, no, good Sir, only
when I am in the mood.
yy

Very
Weil, fo be it ; but obServe, I begin
from this moment, for there lie your
feififars, and there they muft lie, I
dare not take them up for the world.”
\
“ Very docile, indeed, I really have
fome\ hopes of you from this fpeci-
men;
/
WREATHOF FRIENDSHIP* llg
men; but if you pleaSe, as I am buSy netting, you miy give me them for this once, and you may alSo ring the bell, as I want Some fiik, and am too idle to rife my Seif ” I flew to the bell, and rung Such a peal that in a few moments came Lady St. Clair; blefs me, Julia, I was afraid that you were ill by the vehemence with which you
’ Oh, no, Ma’am, it was only Mr. Drummond’s awkward way of doing it; he is Such an impetuous creature, and fo abfent he never knows what he is about.” A good hint for me. I made my peace with the old lady, promiling not to alarm her again.
rung ?
Soon after this converfation we took our leave, and arrived at home two minutes and a half too late for dinner; our old Lord’s patience was quite
exhaufteds
;
i:
I
I
I
. I 1

I i !
120 WREATH OR FRIENDSHIP.
exhausted, and we Spent the reft of the day, ah! how unlike the morning.

In a few days there is to be a grand gala at the Abbey ; his my fair one’s birth day, and we are all to put on our gayeft attire. After this feftival you Shall hear from me, perhaps, fee
N
me, if I can.perfuade myfelf to leave this little Syren.
/
S'
Your’s ever.
II. DrummonI
LETTER
\.
.. ■
WREATH OF FR l END'SHl'P. 121
\
LETTER XV

. \
IFIy Julia Ear court, to Mifs
Lvingjion-Ahley^ May 4.
AM exceedingly rejoiced, my dear Eliza, to find that you have got Such an, agreeable addition to your Society, in the perSon of your ciericcil beau. I am quite of Mrs. Morton’s opinion, that you would make an ex-
X
cellent wife for the parfon of the parilh^ and to tell you the truth, I put So little faith in vows of a fingle life-, made at fix and twenty, that I am not without hope, that either he or Some other more fortunate Swain, may yet tempt you to light the torch of Hymen*
Voh I.
G
♦ \
1
I '
! ;

• II
I »i
it
) i
, *
• i
i!
122 WREATH OT FRlENr)SH!P*
I am a little alarmed left your Lon,
don journey diould interfere with a
fcheme we have of bringing you here
againll the tenth of this month. It
is, you may recolieift, my hlrth-daj^
and as on that day I have the honour
oidifc
y
is determined to have Some very gaudy
doings. I fhould think it would be So
great a mortification to him that I

. would be glad to pafs it over in
filence ; but he is very good, and
thankfully accepts of me in the place
of a better.
You mufl conie, Eliza, if you can
with any convenience to yourSelf; for
we are not only to have as much
company as our houSe will hold, but
we have made intereft with our neigh
hours to fill their houfes alfo. There-
fore
Wk E ATH OF FRIEND SH I P *
11$
Sore, upon the whole, I am aSraid our
V	'
will be more numerous
than agreekble.
A great inducerherit
you will Say, to perSuadeyou to make one of the party. But at lead it will have variety to recommend ity and that is one .of the greateft requifites '6f human hkppineSsi,
My Father and Selink have been buSily employed for Some days pad, in contriving embeliidiments for this Superb entertainment. The avenue to the houSe is to be elegantly illuminated with coloured lamps ; the band is to be concealed in the Small parlour, that when you enter the hall,, founds divine may break upon the ear. The company are to be introduced into the drawing-room, where they mud remain peaceably till after tea; then, all that chooSe to dance; are to


124 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
go into the long room, which, by tbc way is entirely new painted and fitted up on the occaSmn. Very handSome luftres are already arrived from town, and cut glaSs girandoles are to be placed on brackets quite around the room ; So that I SuppoSe when you enter, the blaze of light will exceed the Sun in its meridian Splendour.
1
-In this place, I am Sorry to inform you, my troubles are to begin; for it is my father’s will and pleaSure, that 1 Ihould ' open the ball, by dancing the firft minuet with any kind Soul who will do me the favour to afk me. I am likewiSe to hand the laft couple in the firft dance, two very agreeable circumftances you muft allow.
\
The
\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I25
The room adjoining is to be finilhed in a very elegant flyle, for refrelhments ; but that I can as yet give you no account of, for my father and Selina have undertaken the whole of that work themSelves, and we are not even to fee it till it is quite completed.
At eleven o’clock the Supper room is to be opened; the conducting of
that part of the entertainment is to
/
reft upon my mother ; you will agree with me that it cannot be in better hands. Two of the beft vocal performers are to be procured from the Opera-HouSe ; their finging, and the many Smart things we flatter ourfelves that our partners will fay to us, will induce us no doubt, to fit a tolerable time to refrefli ourfelves, after the fatigues of the evening. After this it
G 3
will


i
: }
\ i
[ i
126' WREA.TH OF. FRIRNDSHIB,,
will be a matter of choice, and every' body, left to follow their own inclinations. There will be card tables in. the drawins;-room, for the amufenient-
•< > *	A 3*	X
of the grave part, of' the cornpany. •
Were the folly, to end here I flionld; not be So much diftrefled, but at twelve-

.next day, a beakfaft is p be prepared in the temple, which is to be accom-.
panied with more Smart things than I
/
can take the pains to tell you. The 'company.whicn the night before quietly toob, their departurei, are all to be recalled'; and as it is to be a fine Spring morning, every firing 7vill wear a cheerful aSpedt. At two a^-ca^dinner.
vT
not an elegant./one, is to be prepared for the tenants, their wives, &c. which will end with a ball at nierht as
' *	-	* • w	V	A
liSuiiI.*'


WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I27
If all I have Said on this fiibje<5i: will
not tempt you, my friend, to come and join our party, I can only Say you have no curiofity ; and I am very doubtful whether my father will ever think fo well of you again. But if things fliould not go off with as much eclat as he expeds, how much will he be disappointed.
I have written a long letter, without once telling you that the week before laft we were favoured wit h a vilit from old Don Cholerici alias, the Earl of Mordington, and his Ion, and Mr. Drummond, his nephew, who is at prefent on a vilit to him. Lord Weft-bur y is an exad contrail to his father
f
in every thing. That is the inpft Severe thing you ever heard me fay of Lord Mordington in your life, and yet I Seldom Spare him; but his*fon is the
o 4
moil
128 WREATH OF PRIENDSHIP
moil accomplhhed, agreeable, SenSible cavalier I ever met with. He is extremely handfome, has fine dark eyes that Seem to penetrate your very Soul; it would.be impofiible to utter a falsehood and look at him at the Same time: his addreSs is eaSy, his manners finifhed and polite ; in fliort, it is not in my power to give you an idea what he is; but I think the beft way will be for you to come and convince yourSelf. You have yet to make an ac-quaintmce 'with our Selina too, and you don't know how great a pleaSure you are depriving yourSelf of by not knowing her.
Mr. Drummond is quite handfome enough for a man, though he cannot be compared with his coufin; has beautiful teeth; and Such an agreeable keenneSs in his looks, joined to So
large
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I29
■
large a Iliare of vivacitj^ that it Seems, if it were agreeable to him, he could at one glance hit off the ridiculous part of the whole company. I wonder how his uncle and he remain upon any terms; we have Spent Some very plea-fant days in their company, and are already become very good friends. We flatter ourfelves they will be a great acquisition to our approaching gala.	■	'	'
Adieu, my dear girl, let me Soon have the Satisfaction of feeing you here, and you will greatly oblige your affeClionate,.^
Julia Harcourt,
G
:y
•LETTER
12-0 WR.EA.TH.40F FRIENDSHIP
LEX T E R . XVL
Mrs. SeudAoiore.-) p Mifs DarnUy.
MadmSy February 2»
R. and Mrs. DenniSon are. arrived from Cuddalore,. they, le^ye India in a few days..,., and in a ■ few months, will I hope, beheld; the. white cliffs of Albion.
Eleanor will See you, my dear friend^’ as I commiffion her to prefent you; with this letter. She wilh give you a full account of your Emily, her looks, her words, her very thoughts; Ihe. w ill tell you how eontinually you are the fubjedt of her conversation, and.
what
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
I3I
what large poffellions you have in her heart. How heartily Ilie longs to-See the clouded Ikies of Britain, and how weary Iheis of the perpetual Sun-Ihine of the Eaft : but She will alfo tell you, that her diScontent does not appear, offends no one, and that you and herSelf alone are the foie confidants of her thoughts on this. Sub-jed.
I mention this left }T)u Ihould think I am, grown peevilh and fretful. It is neceflary the mind Should have Some faithful friend' to \vhom it can unbo-fom all, its cares and.anxieties; and to whom can 1 fo properly make my complaints as to you, who have, ever been indulgent to my- weakneSs, and will forgive the frailties and follies of' a heart you may command. I am Sen-fible were I but to hinf thefe-things to
/
Mr


J^Z WREATH Q,F FRIEN.DSHIF.
Mr. Scudamore, we Should be on Ihin, board in a month’s time;, as his whole pleaSure.is in contributing to my eaSe and happineSs. I determine therefore to wait patiently, for. the time be, fixes, as I a.m certain he is not , more attach-
r
ed to .this place than mySelf ; and it will, not.b.e delayed a moment after the proper,time...
My friend has brought with her a fwee:t little girl,, whom She doatsupon, and who feems to have entirely ce** mented two, hearts formed for each other, and. who have metin. the moll. Singular manner. Fiom this we may. learn the truth of the precept Jo often, enforced, by our good Dr., Morton,. ‘That there is no fituation in life, how-: ever diftrefling, in. which hope , may, not be indulged, and defpair ba-, nilhed.” That benificent being, who
fees
if
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.

Sees all our a6tions, and judges every’
thought, can turn the moSt untoward
\
appearances of fortune into the means of producing the moft lafting happi-neSs. Eleanor is Sincerely SenSible of this, and the little adverlity fhe expe* rienced has made her in the midii of all her gaiety and grandeur,, moft truly pious and humble..
I am certain you will be. pleafed with her; (he is very defirous of your acquaintance, and bids me fay how much Ihe will think herfelf honoured by your notice; and if not for herfelf alone, yet for the love fhe bears 5^our friend, flie hopes you will allow her to cultivate your friendship. She is juft returned from paying her viSts, and as we have, not much time to fpend together, and it may be long before
we meet again, I am fure you. will ex-
»
cufe
t3'4 WREATH OF FRIENDSHTPi
i
cuSe my leaving this Scrawl to attend to my guefts, and 1 will, conclude it perhaps to-morrow morning>
«4i
\
I again reSume my pen, my dear Eliza, to beg your acceptance of a ■ few trifles, the produce and manufacture of this country; every thing, but -the fliawl, you could get better and, more elegant in London, but they would not then, I know, in yo»r opinion, be of the fame value; and you will give them a place upon your .
I
cabinet, for thcdonor’s fake.
I have juft parted with Mr. and Mr$,
Den niSon, who are retired to reft for the laft night, under this roof;. I fnatch a moment, whilft Lionel is in
his. drefling-room,, to inform you of
a

EATH @'F-FR I EN-DSHIP.
^35
Aegacy Mrs. DenniSon"'has leSt me. The circumstance is So Singular that I cannot help makings you aequaintecf.
with, it.
I
She came to me. this morning, her eyes all Swimming'in tears, and told me She was going to put my friendihip to the teSt, by a requeft She had to* make, and which to be refuSed wouMi make her miserable. “ I have willied to Speak to you on this fubjedt every hbur fincel have been in Madras, but i ;never till this moment could take-courage to alk, So unreasonable a fa^ vour; but 1 know the pleafure you take in Serving; the wretched, and you have it now in your power to make the. widow’s heart ling Sor joy.” ’
Tell me this • momenty l replied, what is this, vail re.queft you make
and
5
136
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
and not delay to enable me to deSeree
’ have every
So high a charader.
reaSon to SuppoSe that I can alk nothing you will reSuSe, and I haften to make you acquainted with the Subjed oSmy embaffy.”
^^•One of my women attendants is of fo very Superior a nature to all we meet with here, that I lament much the impolfibily of making her a partner in my voyage-. Mr. Dennifon does not chooSe I fhould carry more than
s
one woman along with me, which of courfe muft be the nurSe of my infant. But I leave with regret an amiable woman, who has been the Sport of fortune; and whofe fondneSs and attachment to me, and gratitude for my\ attention to her^ has quite gained my heart. I will bring her, with your
leave, •
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I37
leave, to let you See the legacy I wifh to bequeath.’^
Let me, I Said, Step a moment into Scudamore’s Study, as I do nothing without his approbation; and though I am certain of his acquieSding in every thing where human happi-neSs is the objedt; I would not rob him of the merit, or of the pleafurc of one good adion.”
In a moment I was by his fide, my ftory Soon told, and the defire immediately complied with. I returned to Eleanor, who waited, I Saw, in a little fufpenSe, which my countenance presently diffipated; and She went to Seek, her favourite. She Stayed longer than I expeded, and returned overwhelmed with afflidion, leading by the hand a woman, not young, but of a moSt in~
(
terei
■ 1
IjB' WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP'.
tarelling figure, tall and finely made.
v/ith an air of majeftic diflreSs; her
complexion So like an European, that
I was quite ftruck, and had Ihe not
worn ,the eaftern habit, I fhould have
confidered her as my countrywoman.
It was Sometime before any of us
broke filence, when Mrs. Dennifon5,
wiping away her tears and prefentiiig
the hand of her friend to me, addrelfed
herfelf to her, and Said I leave you,
my dear Orixana, to one much more
capable of Ibothing your afflidlions

than myfelfit is not in my power to*
take you along with me, if it were, we
would never have feparated; but in
resigning you to Mrs. Scudamore, I
am Senfible I promote your happineSs
and I give to her an attendant who is
faithful and will make a grateful return
to the h>indn,efs, which, on my ac-
counts
WREATH OF FRI ENDSHIP. I39,
c;ount, I know She will receive. Your grief, tho’ flattering to me, is an injury to yourSelf; and it is my lt(fl requeft that you endeavour to get the better of i|, and exert yourSelf to prove to my friend the: value of the gift which, I
bellow d"
I yet held the hand of the Sorrowful Orixana, who, pale and fenreleSa,. funk fainting into the arms of poor Eleanor. The female Servants we called to affift us, preSently cohveyedi her to a fopha, where, after Some time, She was rellored to herfelf, but not to, happineSs, and_ what will be the consequence of this melancholy parting I know not; but I fear much for my new acquaintance, whoSe heart Seems io= pofTels_ a fatal SenSibility.

140 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Adieu, I have not a moment more
to call my own, and you m\ld take
for granted, all you imagine 1 would
wilh to fay, and all you would > d elire to
hear of your’s,
Emily Scudamore,
A *
LETTER XVII.
Liidj Julia Harcourt, to Mifs Darnky,
May
S the day approaches, and there
is no account from you, my dear
Eliza, I begin to be apprehenlive left
you Iliould either have taken your de-
parture to town before the receipt of
mv
4
* i

\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I4I
mv lafl letter, or at leaft have deter-mined in your own mind, not to make
one in the frolick at Livingllon.
I
believe you are right, for I don’t think a birth-day the time to enjoy the Society of one’s friends; it is all hurry and confulion, without one comfortable moment.
A large part of our viSitors are already arrived. Lord and Lady Barton and their fair daughter, Lady Charlotte, came yefterday. You will Scarce credit me, nhen I tell you, that I think Lady Charlotte increaSed in aife Elation fince I Saw her lad. You always
9
thought her the veryeffence of bon ton, but 1 have now the pleaSure to inform you that fhe is indeed the qnintejfence of every thing that is great in that art.
“Oh, Heavens! Lady Julia,” Said fhe to me, “how can you bear the
in-
id.2 WREATH OF FR I ENDSHi!’-.
inSupportable idea of being made a
%
t^'iiblic Speflacle to the whole country;
ceaSe to be an
thing would
every
amuSement to me that the canaille were to partake with me. I am aftonimed, my dear, how you can indulge your father in So ridiculous a Scheme; be-lidcs, you might as well give a celti-ficate of } cur age to every Soul in the neighbourhood; all the horrid crea-tures will be able to Say, it is juft So fnany’years fince I.ady Julia Harcouit was one-and-twenty.’’ “ Very true^ Lady Charlotte,” Said I, “ and yet that is an idea that never preSented itSelf to iHe before; tbo’ I perfectly remember your father giving a great entertainment in 'Town, about four years ago, when your Ladyftiip arrived at the Same time of life.”
She

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 145
She alTured me I was miftakcn with regard to dates, but however it had the defired effed; of lilencing her, at leall for that time, as to birth-days-. Wehave likewife got the addition of a beau in the houfe, Mr. Selwyn, a distant relation of my mother’s. He is about lix-and'-twenty, a yery genteel agreeable man; Selina and myfelf were half inclined to fall in love with him when he firll came, but he had Hot been two hours in company till we discovered his charader to be fo wonderfully impetuous that there is no venturing to contradid him ; and in
an argument ( by the by, he is Scarce
«
ever out of one ) he Supports his Opinion fo ftrenuoufly, ’and with fo much warmth, that he really alarms the flout ell of us.
Ladv
144- WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Lady Charlotte cannot endure his noiSe, it is abSolutely more than her nerves are equal to, to Spend an hour in his company. ‘‘ Would you had never com-e, Mr.Selwyn, exclaims flie in the mod pitious ftyle, or I had been fortunate enough to have paid my vi«
fit here at another feaSon.

All Ih
e
can Say gives him no disturbance, for he treats the poor lady as if She had not common understanding.
He Spent a great part of laSt winter at Paris, and lodged in the Same houSe with Mr. Drummond, therefore mv father has Sent to requeSt .his company with my Lord Weflbury’s to tea and fupper this evening. I think I hear their carriage, and I honeStly confeSs 'it is a talk greater than I can impoSe upon myfelf, to fit writing here, even to you, Eliza, when I know thoSe
gentlemen
WREATH OF FRIENOSHl’T. I
gentlemen are below flairs; I will, if I can, find an opportunity to letter to-morrow^
Adieii-.
Fhurjdny Morning, May -t dijj
We Spent a charming evening yeS-tcrday. Had you feen Lord Well-bury, without his father to tornTent him, you would have befen quite delighted with him; So polite and attentive in his behaviour to every body. When he converSes, it is with Such a manly fteadineSs, he delivers his Sentiments with So much SenSe, and with-Cfut one grain of alfedation, that he claims the attention and approbatic'il of all liL hearers. When he Speaks to Selina he is particularly pleaSihg ; he
Vol. 1
rl
146 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
addrefles her with So much SoftneSs in his manner, and waits for her replies with Such a delight in his countenance, that I am very Sure he mull admire her. Indeed, who ever Saw her that did not admire her ? But I am willing to think he feels a particular alFedion for her; that is an idea I dare not fugged; to any creature breathing but yourfelf.
We "w^ere very much diverted with Drummond and Selwyn ; the one will no more brook contiadiDion than the other ; but Drummond has a peculiar archnefs in his manner, which gives him greatly the advantage, for he appears all the time to be ridiculing ill nature, and laughing at the follies of mankind.
I
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
147
I muft give you a description of an
odd group that came this morning.
^ %
We received a card from Mrs. Moore^
( whom if you recolle6l we vilited the lad time you were here ) to fay fhe had a family from London flaying with her, and flie would, if convenient, bring them with her. My father Sent an anSwer, to beg their company; and, as they lived at Some diflance, re-quelled they might come to dinner, which was without hefitation complied with, and this morning accord-
4
ingly they came.

Mr. Moore entered firfl, and intro* ducedthe lady, who is a little fat figure, drefled in a white lutefiring gown, and, as if fhe was determined her heifdu:
o
fhould Save her nothing in the article of Silk, it is made to Sweep gracefully behind her at lead twice her length
H 2
V
148 WREATH OP FRIENDSHIP

upon the floor. She has a moft elegant ^vig made with fine drop curls,’ that hang down to the bottom of her back; and a Small chip hat Set on one Side of her head, with a profufion of white feathers and yellow ribbons; a broad yellow ■falh tied round her waift, and an enormous mofegay of artificial flowers ; a fan, open and Spread before her in her hand. I fhall never for'get her firfl: •entre-. She was followed by a tall thin 'daughter, dreffed in a Superb painted tiffany, who had fiiridUy complied with the prefent fafhion of looking as Small as poflible; her brother r,ext appeared, as Smart a city beau as ever you Saw ; his fhoes tied in the beft ftyle, and his hair made up in all the nicety of French tafle.
I
The mafter of this family was the
ad of this elegant group, a little ffiff
man
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I49
1
man in a brown bob, a fall Suit of Snuff coloured cloaths, a pair of blue worfted ftockings, and a pair of Small buckles, that had, I believe, been bought in the reign of (^een Anne. As Soon as-, he had Seated himSelf, he accofted my father, ‘‘You live very pleafantly here, my Lord; charming hou'fe, elegant gardens, and extenfive pleaSure grounds; juft the way a man would wilh to live that has no buIineSs to-mind. A country life is the only life for happinefs, my I^ord; I have got a country houSe, my wife and daughter are very fond of it, but my fon and I have other bulinefs ;• but we go every night, except Saturday; I will tell you why we never go on Saturday, my Lord,—Some people make Saturday afternoon a holiday, others receive their money for their week’s labouiv and fo get drunk; fo I drink there k-
H %
more:
IsO WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
more danger oijire on Saturday, than
on any other day of the week—that i
IS
the reaSon we Hay in town to watch ; for as I alwa)’s Say to'Jacky, mhid the jhop^ and theJJjop zvill mindy-ou. Bufi-neSs well attended will turn to profit; and indeed he is a very good boy and
minds w hat I Say to him, and that is
« »
the way to become a great man, and enjoy himSelf when he grows rich, as you do, my Imrd, and never to be proud. Pride is a bad thing; 1 never
];new what pride was ; I have tlie lame pleaSiire in Seeing my friends when i am behind the counter in my canvaSs ileeves, as I have at one of my wife’s routs. Never let a man be afhamed of his profefiion, my Lord, that is one of my maxims, and a very good one it is ; experience fliews it; my profefiion ha' done imuch for me, anci I was never alhamed of it in my
life.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
15^
/
iiSe. Wherever. I am known, I am known for an honefl; man, and that is a meat chara6ter> as the world soes,
O	O '
more than all	men of quality
can Say. I beg ^mur pardon, I mean no refledtion' upon you ; every body Speaks well of your Lordlhip, I am fure.’^
I thought the young lady Seemed a little diftrefled at the volubility of her father’s tongue, and therefore, like a good chriftian, I was willing to relieve her, and took a feat next her. I a Iked her if She was fond of dancing, as I hoped we Ihould be able to have a very good dance this evening, “Oh, yes, ma’am, I am extremely fond of dancing; but I get a vail deal of it, for we have private bails very often, and my mama and I make a point of never milling the London, I think
\
H 4
your
WREATH OF FRTENDSHi?
3iourLa’f}iip never goes to theLondon: I SuppoSe you don’t choole to come into the city ; but I can alTure you we have very genteel vaft -deal of good company.
meetings,
and a
I told her I did not doubt the ele-ance of their parties at all, but that 1 was So little in town I had not an opportunity of being much feen m public; and as I found She Only willied her father to be Silent that flie might harangue in her own way, I thought my-felf justified in leaving her, to acquaint you, my friend, with all that was going forward..
1 have been fo buSy with the ridiculous part of the company, that I have xtever told you we have the Hon. Mr.
Lefley, and his fifter, flaying with us;
♦
they are n;ft fuch kind.of people as
you
WREATH OF FRIEls^DSHIP* 153:
y^ou would like. I cannot bellow a higher panegyric upon them.
I.intended to have alked Selina to afSiIl me to-day in writing to you, but to Say the truth, Ihe looks So beautiful, thatd cannot ^bear the thoughts of her being abSent from company, tho’ but for a Short time. So you muft content yourfelf with hearing lefs of our proceedings. Her dreSs is a thin mullin, glazed, and black ornaments ; indeed'
Cj	'	'
Ihe is a lovely' figure. Our neighbours will be coming Soon, and then I declare I; will not, write any more this.' evening.^.
Lord Mordington is to be here; you may fuppofe that is a great compliment to me, but Somehow I am become a mighty favourite of his lately. Selina is to dance the two firfl dances
5
with
154 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
/
with lord WeStbury, and your friend
with Drummond. I am Sorry to add
' \
we are to change partners, for I' am. Sure wc cannot meet with any body more agreeable to us.
I mull be obliged to confeSs there is a Sort o£ flirtation between Drummond and mySelf, but it is a; very (Irange one; he is Sometimes So pro-digioiifly attentive and civil, that I regard the conqueSl as Secure and then without any vifible reaSon, he flies to> the other end of the room and don’t vouchsafe even to look at me for two^ or three hours together. He is a flrange animal,Tut I muft Suit him as well:
as I
can.
I am fummoned down.
9
flairs. Adieu, my ever dear Eliza, may, liappincSs ever attend you, is the Sin? cere prayer of your
Jiilia Hareourd..'
letter
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
J55
LETTER XVIII.
Lady Julia Harcourt, in continuation
Livingjlon-Abhey, May 11.
UR ball, my dear Eliza, was as elegant and Splendid as my father’s heart could have wilhed. The company Seemed to enjoy their entertainment, and during tea, the gentlemen were So extremely brilliant, and Said So many Smart things, that they made that part of the evening, which v/e expedled would be the moft heavy, quite the contrary. 1 hold it however impoffible for a company of mortals to
I
Spend five hours together, without Some crofs accident to interrupt their mirth ; and fo it happened to us<
I
156 WREATH OF -FRIENDSHIP-.
I liad the honour of dancing the, firft
minueti with Lord Wfeftbury ; he was
then defired to-take out another lady,
and he very properly led out Selina.
She looked lovely indeed, and danced
better than J ever faw any body.
As Soon as the minuet was over, Lordv
Weftbury. Seated himSelf :next,heT, and
they Seemed So entirely engaged in
conversation with each -other, that I
verily believe theyvdid notcondeScend
to cad one glance-- towards any other-
objedt, for above, two. hours. L. ob
ferved old Tedy did not like.it at all;
he was in a continual fret, but< he had
been in,Such violent good- humour all

(
lay,.I,had no fear his-temper woukL:
So I Sake him at that time
.v:*
When notice was given for the
country dance,, lady Charlotte de
■o
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
^bf
dared herSelf quite unequal to the fa^ tigue, the very. idea.wasdnSupportable^. conlequently Lord Weftbury handed Selina' to the head of the room;:, Drummond and mySelf walked quietly, to the bottom^ Lord Mordington could no; longer bear it,. “ Why, Charles, you puppy !’^ exclaimed: he, what are you dohrg } why don’t you%
hand Lady Julia to. her place?” “Lady
Julia, is- engaged, Sir, and wilhes to
Hand at the bottom. lam going tQ-
* ^
dance with MiSs Couitnev,’’
You are going to do no fuch'< things Sir; it is all a plot, a.con--trivance hetweenyou and Henry tO' torment. and, vex me; , your whole. pleaSure is to make'me-miSerable. You knew if was my' wilh you Ihould dance with Lady Julia, and for that reaSon' you fufFered Drummond to ,afk her,..
andi
O

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
and you mull take MiSs Courtney, a girl that nobody knows.'’*
Here my father took the alarm!
It is to me, my Lord Mordington you muftanfwer for thefe words; Mifs Courtney is my ward, and I will not fuffer any foul breathing to treat her with difrefpe61:. Her family is full as genteel as any in the room, and give me leave to add, that thofe people do not know their lofs, that are unacquainted with her.**
Poor Selina! you will feel for her Situation ! the eyes of the whole room fixed upon her; every body waiting for her to begin the dance.
At this juncfture, the amiable Lef-leyj with a heart ever ready to relieve the diftreffed, joined to a flrong defire
of
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I^C)
gS making himSelS agreeable to Selina, came to her relief, and requefted he might have the happineSs of going down tlise dance with her, and he would then refign her to Lord Weft-bury. My father took her hand from Wedbury, and .,gave it to Lefley* “^Aye, do fo, do So, Said Don Choleric, and then Charles Ihall dance with Lady Jiilia,’^ ‘‘Indeed, he will not, my Lord, faid I, it.is Mr; Drummond I have promifed to dance with, and I make-a confcience of never being worfe than my word.”
“ What, do you confpire to teafe me ? Have you joined in the league to make my life as miferable as polfible ? Speak to her, my Lord St. Clair, and infift upon her doing as She ought,” I begj.iincle, faid Drummond, if you don’t choofe your. Son to dance,
- you
l^'O" WR HATH O R F R IE N I>S HI Pv
you will not interfere with* my •happi* neSs the world 111 all not oblige me to give up my partner, and therefore,”
your tongue, Henry, hold your tongue, don’t provoke me; you
f
will put me in a pallion, and then you don’t know how you may get me appealed again. I am not often in a pallion, but if you once provoke me,* you don’t know where it.may end.”
‘‘Why then, my Lord, to make the matter Ihort, and prevent bad confe-quences, I believe it will be bell to let Julia follow her own inclinations; Ihe is a perverfe girl, you know, and not much ufed to contradiction; and you,' my dear: Selina, will call this firft dance with Mr, Lelley”. This was a fort of compromise, and therefore to be complied with.' Lord, Weftbury.
fclded
I.
/
WREATH OF ERIEKDSHIP. l6j
folded his arms, and retired to a Seat
^ / ■
in the corner, more out of humour than I thought it poITible for him t<> have been.
Lady Charlotte blefSed her flats that Lord Mordington was no relation of her’s, for he had thrown her into a nervous tremour Ihe had no hopes of recovering for a month to come. The city miSs looked as if fhe would have faid we have no fuch brutes at the London ; and her brother feemed to fay, he would rather watch thefhop every Saturday night for a year to come, than Papa fliould Scold him So much. I believe we were all a little disconcerted, but a fliort time reftored us to our former Selves.
As Soon as the dance was over I ob-ferved Selina go up to Lord V
l6l WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
and with the Sweeteft Smile in the world, told him, “ (lie was afraid Ihe had been the cauSe of much uneaSineSs to him this evening, by drawing upon him his father’s diSpleafure; Ihe
intreated he would not think of
\
dancing with her, as flie would not for the world do any thing that might give offence to Lord Mordin'gton.”
\
You the cauSe of unealineSs to me, my angel! faid Weft bury; im-poftible! it is from you alone that I can ever hope for any earthly joy or fatisfadtion. Tho’ myfather’s petulance may render me truly uncomfortable, it fir all never prevent me declaring the moft unalterable, unchangeable af-fedlion for my Selina !” As he pronounced thofe words he prefled her hand to his lips with So gallant an air, and looked at the Same rime Sc beautiful,
4
I

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
163
I don’t think there are many of us cruel fair ones, ^ except you, Eliza ) tliat could have withftood him.
As no part of this pretty fpeech was intended for me to hear, I thought it time to move my quarters before it was difcovered that I was in the Secret. Now perhaps you will Sufpedt me of being a little fpiteful, for it appears very plain to me, through the whole of this fcene, that the worthy old gentleman intended me for his fon, had not Selina’s fuperior charms Supplanted me. But don’t millake, my dear. So generous and difinterefted am I, that I can with pleafure refign him to my friend ; and if the fates ordained it, could be well contented with the nephew, who, no doubt, in point of outward accomplifliments is inferior to
my
IC>4 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
\
my Lord Weflbury. So depraved you See is Some people’s tafte.
Lord Weflbury refuSed to dance,, but took his place at a card tablfe hill Supper was announced; he then Seated himSelf next to Selina, and the reft of the evening pafledoff with the ut-moft conviviality and good hu»
mour

I had al'moft forgot to tell you, T was much disconcerted by my father introducing Captain Douglas at dinner^ whom you may remember I met with in the Park the laft time we were ia town.—I am called, for. Adieu, my dear friend, believe me your’s with the mofl unalterable affedlion^
J. II.
LETTER.

■WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 1.6<
LETTER XO
Henry Drummond^ Efq-. to the Rev.
E, Seymour.
Wejibury - Lodge y May it.
N my lafl:, I delired you to begin to teach me wiSdom ; I now Sit down to beg you will give yourSelf no trouble about a talk So difficult. I am determined to live and die in the folly
that now polFelTes me^ that of loving,
/
without daring to hope for a return ,* but the object is of So Superior a nature that Such reverence appears to me a part of my duty, and I yield entirely to So charming an impulfe-.*
You
l66 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
You perhaps expeD an account of the company, and the entertainment
of yellerday, but I
deScribe no Such
trivial matters, oh ! that I could paint to jmu, as I feel, the merits of that amiable woman who deigns to call me
O
friend! yes. and She calls mie by that dear name in earneji, Seymour ! There is happin^Ss fufficient to intoxicate a flrons;er head than mine. But whither do I ramble ? let me begin the ftory,
i
4
which I am fure I Sliall tell wretchedly, but you mnji know it.
After dinner, when every one had drank his glafs in honour of the day, and when the good wifhes of the guefts had brought tears into many bright eyes, Lord St. Clair ^was called out upon bufinefs. After a little time had elapfed he returned, leading by the hand an officer, young and handfome;
all
/
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 167
all eyes were upon them, but our attention was particularly arrefted, when going up to Lady Julia, he Said, ‘‘ his to you, my dear girl, this gentleman IS delirous of making his acknosw ledgments ? his from you, he fays, he has received his prefent happineSs, and he wiSlie's, in the moSt public manner, to alTure you of his gratitude. On no other day would I have diftrelfed you with this fcene, but now! when your merit has confirmed my felicity in the mod unexpected manner, you muft for once bear with the peculiarities of a fond father, and allow this gentle-
V-
man
, (what he is fo defirous of doing)
to tell the ftory, in which you bear fo confpicuous a part.^’
Good heavens !■ what were my fen-fations at this moment ? Julia was overcome with confufion, She was
ready
. t
168 WREATH OF ERIENDSH 1 K
ready to faint in the arms of this firanger; I thought I beheld the lover ready to receive the hand of his fair
miftreSs. In Iliort, every poUibilityj and every impofhbility, that could prefent itSelf, overwhelmed my mind. But Lady Julia was retiring; with a faint voice Ihe intreated her father’s leave to withdraw ; I faw her quit the room; the youth remained, and I was riveted to my chair.
When the female part of the company had retired, and Lord St. Clah was convinced his daughter’s indiSpo-fitioH was only occaSioned by this cir-cumllance, he deSired the young gentleman would in a few words, Satisfy the curiolity he had raifed, and relate the manner in which his daughter had been the happy means of his good

$
With
%
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 1^9
With pieaSure, Sir, fliall I give the hiftory of that benevolence, which Ii' s brought back to eaSe and tranquillity, a family once finking Mnder their woes.
*‘It is now above twelve months fihce my dillreSs was at its fummin—The 4bldier of fortune, I had early in life the imprudence to folio v the fenfa-tions of my heart, and make a generous
girl the partner of my poverty; with
«
her hand flie freely gave me her fortune ; this was Small, but our Sanguine ideas thought it an inexhauftiblefand, and we flattered ourfelves that before our little Store fhould be entirely gone. Some happy moment would reward two faithful hearts. How ideal was this expedation ! We had no friends that were able to aflifl: us, and in vain,
did I expefl promotion without mo-
Vol. I
I
ney,

170 Wreath of friendship.
ney, the grand mover of every earthly happinefs. The few hundreds which we Oiice poffelTed were foon fpent; our family dncreafed, and fo did our neceffities; and on the birth of our fourth child we found ourfelves greatly in debt, and our creditors clamorous. I was now obliged to take a Small apartment within the verge of the court, and having obtained leave of abSence for a few months, in this place, I fhut myfelf up, feldorh or ever taking
A
the air even within the limits. My Charlotte’s Spirits began to fail, the infant at her breaft could not there find Sufficient nourifhment; and we oiir-
felves had hardly the means of conti-
► »
nuing our exift ence.
“In this ftate I one day ftrolled be-» yond my bounds; loft in thought, not daring to look back on the paft, and
defpairing
glowing colours.
Wreath of friendship. 171
deSpairing of the future without knowing whither I wandered, I found my-Self by one of the canals in Hyde-Park. I debated in my mind the horrid thought of putting an end to my exillence! My wife and babes Hill presenting themfelves in all their
One moment I receded, the next advanced; and in this manner I fancy I had Spent about half an hour, when the found of horfes
.	t
* f
feet roofed me from my perplexity# Looking up I Saw myfelf obServed by a lady on horSeback. It was early in the day, and I had thought myfelf quite unfeen ’till this moment. Shame, and a thouland crouding fenfations made me quit a Spot wnich had given birth to fuch fatal ideas. I walked Slowly away, my eyes fixed on the earth, ’till paOing the kdy, I heard fomething fall. I turned
I a
roiTtid^i

tfl WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP^
round, and beheld an elegant purSc, It muft be the property cff the fair horfewoman. I took it up, poor as I was, my honefty did not for a moment forfake me. Begone, temptation, faid I, I have had enough of thee; let integrity guide the reins.” I flew back, calling as I ran to the attendant, who followed. ‘‘Stop your lady, that I may return what She has loft.” I preSented .the .purfe, and bowing, turned away. She called me toiler. “Sir, you have had the good luck to take up a trifle of little uSe to me, perhaps may not look upon its contents with the fame indifference. I flatter myfelf you will pardon a little flrata-gem, made ufe of to try if my conjectures were well founded ; the flate of mind I have juft had occafion to ob-ferve muft have fome caufe. If the want of what that purfe contains, oc-
xaSiOiSed
%VREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 173
saSioned the perturbation I have remarked, take it, and believe I would do Hill more to Serve, the vmfor-
tunate.

“ Gracious god! I exclaimed, haft thou Sent an angel to minister to my diftrelSes! to reftore me the live^ of a wife and children I or- is it a mortal thou haft endowed with fuch humanity r* It is a mortal Sir, weak and erring as yourfelf; go home to your family, and make them eafy if pof-fTible, and be fo yourfelf; if this trifle is not Sufficient for that purpofe, in a little time I can do more; give me your addreSs, his all the return I alk, and hafte to the relief of your family.’’ I had a card in my pocket, and juft ftrength enough to give it, when leaning againft her horSe, I could
13
hardly
174 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
hardly Support mySef from falling ; a ftarting tear at this moment reftored to me my faculties. Tell me, I Said, what name it is I muft teach my little ones to llSp ? for whofe felicity they muft. offer up their daily prayers ? and I will go and bid's them vyith the news
I
of Still having bread to give them.” ‘‘That, faidmy benefadrefs, is a matter of no confequence, in a few days it is poffibie 1 may my Self call on Mrs. Douglas. In the mean time I wifti you all poffibie happinefs”.
“ I returned home with a heart as light as the air I breathed, and on entering my own door meet the bailiff whom, before I had So cautioufly avoided. “ Come in, friend, 1 Said, I no longer fear you, 1 have the means to Satisfy your demapds: ” (for I had the curiolity to look at the contents of
X 4
my
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 175
my purfe, I found there ten guineas, and a forty pound note.) Thirty was what this creditor required, and a very Ihoit timfe finiQied the bufineSs. to our mutual SatisSa<3tion. My wife-
I
trembling and fearfull durft hardly afk by what Strange event I had^come intO' poffeffion of fuch a Sum.” ‘‘It is broad; day light, furely you have taken no illegal means to procure it I had no difficulty of convincing her all was well, and on hearing my ftory her gratitude was almoll Superior to mine.
“ i {pent a charming hour with h«* and my little ones; and then fet out to defray my only remaining debt; it was to the jtaylor, who had been very merciful to me, and I could not anfwer it to my conscience to delay ■ longer the payment when it was in my power.
I4
I
176 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
f apologized to him for being So dilatory, and told him my neceflitics were the real caule.—An officer was in the room who-bore marks of-hard Service and Healing age. Young man, (ad* dreffiiTg himSelf to me ) you Seem ho-neft, I am Sorry you are poor; let me into 5^our hiftory, and tho’ I cannot Aow affift you, perhaps fbmetime it may be in my power. I expect in a little time to be rewarded for theSe maimed limbs by a Regiment; give me your name, when that happens I whll remember you.I told him every thing I have now related, and the old gentleman’s eyes were filled with Sympathetic tears; from that moment we have continued our acquaintance, and yefterday I received from him a captain’s commiffion in the regiment he hasatlaft obtained. We are going to India immediately, but I could net
leave
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
07
leave England without paying my re-fpeds to the author of all my good fortune, who has been unceaSingly kind ; to my family, and has often blefled us
with her Society; This, gentlemen, is
«
“my round unvarnilhed tale^.V-
’Tis' unneceflary, Seymour, to tell' you the comments upon it; your heart will anticipate them, and L think it is actory that will pleaSe you. Adieu, , to-day we are going to a ruftic dinner ftill in honour of this enchanting mortal*. J have, not' a • moment, more to throw.away upon you; very Soon you Iball hear again from your.
i
II. -D
li

17^ WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
LETTER XX.
Lady Julia Harcourt,. to MiSs
Livhtgjlon-Abbey, Saturday, May 18'^
AM happy to inform you, my dear friend, that our tumultuous gaieties are all over, and that we have once more retiirned to our former peace and tranquillity; Our guefts have almollall taken their departures ; we have none remaining but the Lefleys, and coufin Selwin. But why happy you will fay; it is not very natural for a young lady, rather of a gay turn, to be happy at the conclulion of balls, public break-
faSls, &c. and at the departure of a reat deal of good company from the houfe.
I
All
5
WREATH OF FRI ENDSHIP. 179
All this is very true, Eliza, ,but tho> I am fond of mirth, I do not love riots and dancing; they are, as I before proved to you, feldom productive of any thing but unealinefs, as poOr Selina can witnefs. I love the country in its limpleft form; on that account our Second day’s entertainment pleaSed me more than the firft. If we are to have diffipatitm, let it be in London; there we cannot fright the humble villagers, nor turn the heads of our country neighbours. . This fliould be the manfion of peace and innocence. The company we have.at prefentinthe houSe is exaClIy to my tafle, and when joined by our agreeable neighbours, who mull be an addition to every circle, we are quite com-plete. The manly SenSe of Weflbury, the vivacity of Drummond, joined to the good humour of Lehey, with a little acid poured . in agreably enough now
and
•
3^0 WREATH OF FRT1?Jt
and then by ^lwin> prevents our conversation from becoming either tedioui
or
Our. evenings are devoted
to Social converSe; Sometimes cards .are called in as auxiliaries for the relief «fmy Father and Mother,, who have riot you know So many prejttyr SiiitaT tions to amufcThem as young people t Tho’I mufl do them the joftiee to/ay,i. they alw.ays^hnd; plcaStye': in purTatioT. nal ciitertainments?. We, have occa-? iionally a Iktie mufic;>SeIina lings like* a- Syren, I cap, you.; know, quayer a,
Weftbury plays in aTnafterlyT ftyle on the\ german flute, and in ftiorts
towards.
we can. all do
»wn
0;jr mornings ..are entirely at our-
A
The love.lineSsv.oS the;
SeaSon, naturally- leads us,.out - ofvdoors.
our aniurementj when ,.we dp no^
ride>.
WREATH OF- FRlENDS^IilP. I Ed,
t^e, Selina-, and my Self, wander fortK
I
Relighted with, the. opening, proSpe(5t, viewing with rapture.the trees which are-putting on their green attire, the flower--ets that are juft lifting up their modeft heads- on every hillock or, liftening. ^ the.murnuiis o£the,diftantwater-falh.
A
S
Nature inanifnate employs Sweet founds'^.,
But animated Nature Sweeter ftilj,
'To Sooth and Satisfy the human ear.;.
¥
Ten thouSand . warblets cheat, the day^
and one
The. live long ni whofe notes
nor thefe alone
%
Nice fingered art mull emulate in vai»i But cawing rooks, .and. kites that Swint Sublime
In ftill repeated-cIrcles, Screaming loud:.
The jay, tfie pie, and even the boding owl.
*	4
That hails the riling moon, haye chpaxm$,: Son me...
You will think I am become quit& ast .entJmfiafl:,,, and,gain talk of nothing

i82 WRiEATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
but the joys of rurallife; as thofe however are fo much to your own tafte, I need not make an apology for en-larging upon that fubjeft.
MiSs Lelley’s delicate State of health confines her to the ufe of the chariot with my mother. She is a charming woman, has Seen ^ great deal of the world, and has profited by the obferva-tions She has made upon it. Her opinion is of importance on almoft every fubjedt; I never hear her fay an ill-natured or Satirical thing of any body, but always ready to extenuate or excufe thofe that are accufed. How melan-
r	«	«
choly, that fo amiable a perfon fhould labour under a continued Series of ill health, which renders her entirely unfit foy the more adtive duties of life: for I am flilf of opinion, notwith-
ftanding
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 183
Handing all your auguments to the contrary, that the higheft charader a Senlible woman can appear in, is a wife and mother.
would not, however, have you fup-poSe, tho’ I have Iketched out to you the plan of life we purSue, according fo much with my own way of thinking, that we are exempt from troubles. No fuch thing; whenever my Lord Mor-dington favours us with his company, we are as much tormented as if we were pent up in a populous city, and obliged to bear all the noife of a clamorous multitude. His ill humour is intolerable, and unfortunately he comes much oftener than he ufed to do; I flatter myfelf all his vigilance will not prevent Wellbury continuing his partiality for Selina. But I don’t know
why
184 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
why I Iliould Say So, for I think (he. has ■ almoft as good a chance, of ha|)-pinefs with Lelley, who is extrerriely fond of her. MiSs Lelley is alfo very much attached to her, fo that I aih Sure they would be a family of 'bar--mony ; and at any rate it is but un^ comfortable to • be connected with a: fet of people who. are not defirous of the alliance. But fo blind are we tO' our own happineSs, that Selina feems vilibly pained by every attention of Lelley’s, while lire receives the mod: trifling civility from: 1 Weftbury with heart-felt fati’sfa<dion. As I don’t think, one perfon can judge of another in tkeSe affairs, I have carefully', avoided * mentioning, this oblervatioBr herw
I > am very much adoniflied at. not‘healing from you, I can only account
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP,
count for it, by Suppofing you intend to furprize us with a vilit, either in going or returning from London; don^t let me be miftaken in my conjecture. Le voila^rrive cc fripon, this Drummond to fee if we will ride this morning. His importunities cannot be refiSled, Bon jour ma tres-aimable, & trcs parfaitemeiit
amie
Votre
Julia Harco-urt.
LETTER
|86 WRfATH OF FRIENDSHIP
LETTER XXr.
Mils Darnley, to Lady Julia Mamun.
Londont May
Rom the fountain of pleafure and diffipation, your friend, my Julia,
addrefles you. I told you in my laft that
\
I expeded a friend of my dear Mrs. Scudamore’s from India. The moment I heard of her arrival, I left the peace-full vale of Wansford, and got fafe to town about a week ago. This hally departure mull be my apology for not anSwering your agreeable letters; and you mull make my peace with Lord St. Clair, for not accepting his invitation to the celebration of your birth day.
Where
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 187
Wherever I am, it mull be a day marked by a thouSand agreeable reflexions. You are a real blefling, my dear Julia, to all who have the happi-neSs of calling you friend; without the affeXation of appearing always in the right, you have fo many ways of making all around feel that felf complacency and inward fatisfaXion which is the only Sure foundat ion of real en-
joyment
I do not mean to flatter
you, but my heart is fo warmly attached to you, that I cannot at all times reftrain my pen.
I had the pleaSure of hearing a moft favourable account * of my friend Emily, who has Some expeXation of
f
being in England before many months are elapSed. Mrs. DenniSon is an agreeable lively woman ; when I fee you, I will give you the particulars of :	her
l88 wreath OF FRIENDSHIP,
«
her ftory, which are very romantic; She Speaks in raptures of Mrs. Sen-, damore and her hufband, and fays they are extremely happy, only they have no children. As Ihe Spoke theSe
- N	.
words, die claljped to her bofom a lovely infant that Sat Smiling on her knee, and all the mother Ihone. in. lier expreffive eye.
Sl'here are little Strokes of tender-xieSsthat affeftone more than,the moft elaborate and ftudied Speeches ; this was one of thoSe, and I drew out mv handkerchief without knowing why I was in want of it. She has promised to Spend Some time with me, but not at
1 have been much diverted dhee I came to town, by the numerous wants my maid has discovered that I
Imvei
WREATHOP FRIENDSHIP. 189
have ; and you muft expeft to See me; a very fajhionable lady, at icail, as far
as dreSs can conftitdte that characf er. I have been under the inilliiier’s care to reform my gothic fafte, and v/hen-ever She Sends me any new things home, Ihe attends to See I do not put them on in an old fafliioned way. In the midft of ail this frippery, how my heart lighs for eaSe and retirement. But the folly of my maid and my milliner is not my only evil; unforFmately I have a very numerous and genteel acquaintance, who are So polite as to
f
to call upon me every morning, and I mull either be talked to death at home, or I mull fly from (hop to Shop, and from one Scene of conftrfion to another, till the agreeable hour of dreffing, I
O	iwV
endeavour to behave like themSclves, at Icaft as far as my country manners will permit, but I find the conver-
fation
190
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
fation of the preSent age is chiefl}^ made up of exclamations; and they who are happy enough to make a discovery of any defeat or miftake in a friend or acquaintance, are Sure of universal applauSe.
Mcthinks I could be as Severe (tho^
tending to a different point) as the company I now affociate with, upon the follies as well as vices of the age; Pope’s description is but too juft A youth of frolic, an old age of
cards.
yy
But my railing at the world will not reform it, therefore I Suffer myfelf to be dragged from one place of
public refort to another, with all the
%
patience of a ftoic; and pleafe myfelf in refleifting better things are in ftore for me. Such conversation, my dear Julia, I intend to leave in three days,
and
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
19 I
and recompence mySelf for what I Suffer here, in tiie agreeable Society at Livingfton,
Tell Lady St. Clair I will do myfelf the honour of Spending a week with her, and 1 Ihall in that time I hope learn as many amiable virtues from her, as I have been lofing hours with the gay company I now keep. I wilh moft impatiently for the day when I Ihall once again fee my friend, my Julia, my companion. I love you fo fin-cerely that the profpe<51; alone of being with you gives a glow of pleafure to my bofom, ealier felt than defcribed. You muft prepare Selina to love me; being your friend, enfures her a place in my heart. I Ihall have great plea-lure in feeing one who ftands fo high in your efteem.
1
192: WREATH.0F PRlENDShll*.
4
I begin to Sear for your poor heart * t)rummond Seems to be gaining ground faft ,* I hope he will not prove a traitor and Heal it quite away, but he Seems very weiii inclined to give his own in return, and mutual love has long been ’jT'our criterion oS happineSs. That you ■may enjoy it, with every advantage, is the ardent wifli oS, your
Eliza DarnUv.

.r
t
P. S. 1 have not forgot your in Si nuation about Mr. Seymour, but have not now time to anSwer it. When I See you, I pray you be Sparing of your
raillerv.

WREATH OF TRIENDSHIP.
191
LETTER XXIL
The Rev. Et S^ymour^ to lie
Drummond, Efq.

an
0
hVansford. May 16^
\
OUR letters,dear Drummond, hg,yi^for Some time given me much concern. Your lively imagination has often hurried you beyond the flri(5t bounds of propriety ; but whilO; your heart took no part in theSe follies, I flattered myfelf you .Would Soon return to reafon. I am i Sorry however to obferve, tliat thefe o;aieties are at lensth become .rrr-mhiol.
Excufe me, Drummond, if I feem a litde harfh in my exprelTiOiis; itis not
Vole I.
c-"


iiWREATH' OF ' FRI ENDSHI R.
>a time to Study flowery metaphors, when, a -frierid is in danger ©f lofing
"that integrity which gave addition^
luftre to his other virtues. Your condudt
*	.	r
towards Lady Julia is certainly repre-henlible; and in a ftill deeper Ihade will you appear^ when you confider your engagement with MademoiSelle Sanzey. By every art you were mailer of, you endeavoured to gain her love, and now leave her to regret her folly in years of future mifery; and all this to indulge a very culpable vanity. You have been received a fecond time into ah amiable family, and are repaying their kindnefs to you by betraying their only child into a falSe hope of happinefs; and' will leave her in the fame eafy way to lament her credulity. Thus, Drummond, you will have made
two amiable women unhappy, to
»
amufe an idle hour.
^ '
Aik
•wreath of friencshtp.
195
Aik your own he^rt, if you have s6led with honour or with hunianity; Would you betray a. truft committed to you by an
? how
•then Ihall you anfwer for your preSbnt condu6t ? have you not already betrayed the confidence'of the friends of Mademoifelie Sanzey, and are you not about to ruin for ever the tranquillity
of another happy family? You call
/
yourfelf a gentleman, and exped to bis treated as Such; but you Should endea-vour to fupporc tlie chara^ler which you pretend to. How often have I heard you condemn thole whofe Heps you ate now following! recoiled yonr before it is too Lte, and leave a place, where you are every moment in danger offorfeiting thathqnor which you have till lately fo greatly prized. Tou condemn the midnight robber, who takes from you what perhaps you can very
Kz
w
1^6 WREATH CF ,FRIEl?DSHrP.
fpare, ■ and which the cries. of an heli^ ,lefs family probably have driven him to feek ; but Surely his crime is greater, who robs a fellow creature of peace and happinefs. To your feelings, to your juftice, to your religion, I apply; .ad; like a man of integrity, and xrulj the reft to heavem
I hope to hear froih you Soon, hut ■not from Lord MordingtoVs \ if you cannot refill' a temptation, fly from it; come to me, I will endeavour all in niy power to fettle your disordered thoughts; particularly as at prefent I am in want of comfort. Mifs Darnley is gone to London, and in her return is to viSit Lady Julia, who I underftand is her moll intimate friend. The country has loll moll of its charms, in her abSence; let me then, my friend, per-fuade you to come and (hare with me
I
thofe
/
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 197
tSoSc pleasures we here can boaft ; yon will find a lelf-approving conScience one of the firft bleffings a mortal can enjoy. In this retreat you will recover your fenSes, and See the dangerous precipice which you have eScaped; and in your Seymour you will find a Sympathizing friend, who feels more than half vour diftrelfes, and will do every thing in his power to banifh them.

E. S.
K3
LETTER

log WB^EATH O* IRIENDMIS
I. E T T E R XXni.
Menry Drummond, Efq. to ilie Rev.
J£. Seymour,
■%
TVeJlbury-Lodge, May 2;o.
\
%
OU are grown a wretched correspondent, Seymour, who were ©nee very fond of writing; what is it that has wrought this iinpleafant x:hange in you ? is it love, that powerful paffion ? if So, how different are its effedfs on different conflitutions ; it makes me loquacious to the highefb degtee, and if I am not talking, I muff be writing. I am fenSible that my conversation is tirefome to my friends, becauSe I feldom vary my fubjed. But I have found out the way to hu-fnour Weftbury by turning the cork-
verSation
wreAth-op friendship. I99<
*
verfatioH-on Selina ^ whoSe life and adventures are fo interwoven with Lady Julia’s, that it would be difficult to Separate them had I any inclination; and I fancy I Ihould not much offend you, were I now and then to make your Eliza my theme. I hear fhe is really very amiable, but • absolutely invincible.-
We have been for theSe laft three days on a vifit in the neighbourhood, and were not able to fee our friends at the Abbey till to-day: We went early, and were Shewn into Lady Julia’s dreffing room, ( which is the levee room in the morning); She met me with a Sorrowful countenance. Singing the following fong,
i
Where’s my Twain, fo blithe and'
clever?
Why has he left me all in forrow r
?
K 4
a
TJirci
a©0 Y/-REATH OF FRIENDSHIP?
Three long days arc gone for cyer

^ Since he Said he’d come to-morrow.
^c. &c.
Her affcjiSfced gravity did not loRg
remain, file‘Suffered me to make my
peace with her ; and while Weftbury
and Selina were Saying Soft things in
another part of the room, I Sealed our
reconeiliation on her beautiful hand.
and we are now as good friends ais
ever.
Selwyn came in and did not ap-
pear to relilh the good humour and
familiarity of the company at all; and
flill leSs So, when Lord St. Glair •
entered the room with a letter in his
hand, and addreffing Lady Julia,
Said, “I have a melfage for you, from
Captain Douglas; he begs me to pre-
fent to you his moil refpe6tful ac-
knowledgments on all accountSj more
pat


\VREATH OF FRIENI>SHIP. 201
particularly for your lali a6t of friend-fliip.” ‘‘Oh, very well, my dear Sir, I know what he means perfecUy, you need fay no more on that fubjcd:.**
“ Indeed, but I Ihall acquit myfelf of die charge; this laft kindnefs is, being fponfor for his little boy, who was on Thurfday named Henry, by your deSire. Now pray tell me, Julia, how in the name of wonder you came to fix on this name of all others?’* “Upon my word. Sir, J,—I,—r don’t know,-rit came into my head juft at that mornent; and I thought it would do quite as well as another, as he was at a lofs, and-deli red. me to decide for him.’’ “Very .well, my dear, I have no fort of objedion to it, only I could not help thinking you muft have Some
particular i paif' above all others.”
to that
name-
K 5
/
202 WBEATH OF FRIEND'S^HIP
This laft Sentence was a little hard' iipon poor Lady Julia, who had not-reeovered her confulion ; and her father looked at her with a Tery Signifi • ieant Smile all the time. As for my Self,
tlio’ I could not miftake: this little
/
proof of her attachmen t, yet the diftreSs
it occalioned her, took away all, the
/
pteafure ( at another time ) it would have given me. Selwyn looked tht very image of mifchiefi How can that, cynic fuppofe himfelf an object of, elleem, or prefumie. to talk of love tOi
AW
.But perhaps 1 ought not to blame: in another that preSumption of' which I am myfelf an example.; or confefs to you what I have had the temerity to. do lince this eclaircilfement. On tha Second day of the rejoicings- On Lady Julia’s birth day, w.e were dancing,
amongll
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 203
amqngft the village girls under an awning in the lawn, when a little ena-merd butterfly, with which her lady-fliip’s handkerchief wasfaflened, dropped off, and I unfortunately trod upon it and crulhed it to atoms. She bore it with chrijiian fortitude, 2iXidi only lamented the lofs becaufe it had been the prefent of Selina.
I determined at that moment to replace it by fome trifle emblematic of my love^ and fent to Gray for a golden arrow I hadfeeh worn by fome of my female acquaintances. I fcribbled the following lines for' its pafsport, and waked fome fortunate minute to prefent it in. >
Gb, happy trifle, to my Julia’s break, “‘And there entranced in joy, for ever reft; “ Tell the dear maid, what pangs forher I prove, ^
How oft I figh, how very much I love;
“ Say
.'^04 wkeath of friendship..
** Ssty without her no blifs my heart can know,
Without her fmiles, I Sink to endlefe •woe.’*^
1 carried it is. my pocket till :this jgaorning, and as we were coming away, threw it to Lady Julia; telling ^er it was a rtIIU I had met with Some,. Where, and I knew Ihe wa§ fond of fhem 5 but charged her to open it till fo-^orroTif mrning^ or fhe would not be^ able, to difbover its merit..
I am now living in fuSpenfe (which: Swift fays is the life of a fpidery tiW If know whether Ihe acqepts or rejedts my^ prefent, and my Suit, Weljbury has .
juft told me Mifs Darnly h expedeft at Livingfton,, I fhall then judge, of ,
your choice, and tell.yon truly, ifl think you. have any, hopes; till then iarewdl, think of me as I am, ’’nothing

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 2Q5
extenuate, nor Set down. ought in ma'» lice!*
D
% ^


LET T E R XXIV.
Henry Drumnhond Hci* AO the ,	Vi Keymottr^...
WeJlharyAodge:^ MufAT,,
TRL L me,' my dear Seymour,
what I mull think of the follow^
ing‘ lines from Lady Julia, received this morning .
The wandering fhaft feturns,to tell/" It finds na place of reft;
No. peaceful home wherein to dwdl,
} •
Nftlarbour in my brcaft*
Returns

20S
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Returns to fay that Julia’s heart,
To friendfhip only true,
Turns from the fight of Cupid’s dart.
Yet “ turning trembles too’**
J. H.
I anticipate your Sentiments on this occaSion. You will Say l am certain that it is the very anfwer I ought to
have wifhed for, fituated as I am;
*
that her friendihip is all I can aSpire to, and that, Ihe freely gives.
I acknowledge the truth of this argument, I agree to my own unworthi-r
nefs;, but I feelit is not the return my
#
heart has been fi ghing. for, or ( fihali I own my vanity,) that I have ex-, peded.
Welibury knows nothing of this affair, and has engaged us to dine at
Lord St*. Clair’s to-morrow ; by that
# 0
time
WREA'TH- OF FRLENDSHIT.
07
timel Iliall perhaps have recovered'; my uSual Spirits, and be ready to con^ Vince LtidrY Julia, that I am Hill
if So Ihe would have it. I now begin to-
>
think it has been accident alone that made her fix on my name for her little-godSon; and this-very thought has almolt, determined me to wifir feriouJIy that her heart may feel nothing more for me: than fimple friendihipi Yes, indeed, 1 wilhvery foon make an>effort to regain; the indifferencef the eafe, and fatisfaftion-I enjoyed ‘ before I met with her; but, this day I devote to disappointed love,, and, tormorrow-1 leavetq^ chance.

As Mif^Darnley is now at theAbbey-^tis not likely Lady Julia and I Ihouldl have a«tete-a-tete,; when that happens;
_	I
(which*. 1 dare not promote) I will: make, my confeflion to her, and let her judge what in. my cafe is beft to be;
done.
\
2o8 wreath of friendship.
done. With whatever She determines for me, I will acquieSce, let miSery be the confequence ! but 1 have not coii-rageto determine for myfelf. I can rea-fon and reSolve, perhaps as juftly as any one; but my paffions hurry me away, and make me err in ading.
The Rbove was written yefterday morning, his now twelve at night, and we are only juft returned from our vi-lit,., Before my ufual Subject takes the lead, let me inform you that I admire yoiir Eliza very much ;. nor do I fee in.her looks, or manner fo hopeleSs. a prpfpeift: as you will apprehend. There is a foftnef^ and gentleneSs in her, bc-hayipur that ^an infenfibility, of mind could,never, inspire; and, when, your liam^ was mentioned, her, cheeks were fuffufed with a more glowing, colour than they bore. at, .our fiiSt entrance •.
Lady
WREATH OF FRIBNDSHIF. 20p
Lady Julia introduced me to her as your particular friend; her eyes were call down at that moment, and a fome” thing or	pervaded her whole frame,
which if I am not miftaken forebodes
\
eood fortune for you.
Lady Julia, and your humble fervant met not with t heir ufual eafe, but it was Soon reftored. I rallied her on having forgot the terms we fet out upon, and told her I did not exped: to have been treated fo much in earneft as to have my gift returned. She took the hint, and rallied in her turn with much art and Spirit, faid, had the trifle come in any other Ihape, it might perhaps have had a better reception, but it came in one fo questionable,” it terrified her, and fhe wa^ glad to be rid 4>f it at any rate. ‘‘ By the by, fays |lie, I believe you have
210 WREATH ©F FRIINTSHTF.
broke thro’ the rules I laid down on's the commencement of our jejl, for, if I remember right, I abfolutely forbad all prefents.’’ Indeed, my fair lady, you made no fuch provifo, nor have I broken the Ihadow' of a com--mandment; therefore do mot let the punilhment exceed the offence, but once more extend your clemency to one who cannot exift under your dif-pleafure.” ‘^Poor foul! wel!^ I will forgive you this once, but beware of a il^hd tranSgrelTion.”
Now, my good Seymour, when you have done making fermons, do take up your pen to me; it really would be very laborious to any one but myfelf, to keep feribbjing at this rate without a return; and I Shall Soon begin to feel myfelf negle6ted.
Y our’s ever,
H. D.
^EATH OF FRIENDSHIF. ait
LETTER XXV.
Mifs Darnky, to Lady Julia Harcourt
JVansford Hou/ef June l
/
OW Sweetly paSs our hours when in the company of thoSe we love ! It was with the deepeft regret^ my friend, that I left you ; with you I feel all the joys of Social life ; it is only when I am parted from you that I find myfelf a Solitary being. Your friendfhip is Sufficient to cheer my lonely hours, and I have often told you I look upon it as the firft bleffing of my life.
Your Selina has delighted me. I thought Livingfton-Abbey could have
no
2.12 WRFATH or FRIENBSHIP4
no addition the laft time I was with' you, yet Selina taught me that no litu-ation in this ftate of being could befo' happy but it might be improved; foti her Society mull add to the pleaSure of any party. I envy you, my Julia, her fiiendihip for you, and Sometimes cannot helpregrettmg that I have not fuch a companion ; but if I. am not dcGefved, even \'ou will be deprive4 ere long of her agreeable Society. Lord Wcftbuiy andJMr* Lelley, if you will allow me. to be a judge, have both felt the power of her accom-plifliments.
Her beauty is much fupei ior to wkat I expeded. You told me flie was handfome, fhe is, in my mind, -the moft finilhed beauty I ever Saw. Her perfon is elegant, and every motion graceful; I fear Lelley wiU be an
unSuccefsful
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
2ia
miSucceSsful lover. Lord Weftbury's Superior accomplilliments muft for

ever banifli hope from his boSom ; I pity him mod fincerely, for who can fee Such perfection and not love it.?
I was much Struck with the manly graces of Lord Wellbury’s perfon as well as mind, he Seems in every point
of view formed to charm and capti-
A.* ■'
vate the foul; and indeed, to proceed further in my account of the date of affairs at Livingdon-Abt^j, I have Some fears for your little ladyjhip.
Before I vifltcd you I had reafon to believe the lively Drummond had not paid fo many vifits at the Abbey without dealing Some part of its beft treafure away ; your behaviour foon
convinced me I was not midaken. I
watched
:t 14,
VTIEATH OF FRIENDSHIP,.
watched you all with great attention, and found love had various methods
of Showing his power. You, my Julia, I Saw with infinite regret had loft Lome of that vivaciy, for which you was So juftly admired. That careleSs eaSe and unafFedted gaiety with which you iifed to treat all your admirers, va-
4
nifties the moment Drummond appears ; and tho’ you attempt to rally, you do it with an air of constraint. Drummond^s extreme vivacity is too much even for you, Sometimes. I love you, my ever amiable friend, with So much Sincerity, that no change
can efcape unobserved* Indeed, Lord
and Lady St. Glair are fo much engaged with their other visitors, that they have not fo many opportunities of feeing you
gether as I hadv
Drummond to-
i
"WREATH OF TR lENDSH I P.
2-1 d
I think your descriptions both of Tord VVelibury and .Drummond were very juft ; perhaps were you to draw •Mr. .Drummond’s pidture now^ you would colour it a littleTho’ he cannot boaft So much beauty as his .coufin, yet there are few men Superior To him in internal accompliftiments.
I arrived at home on Monday about ■tea rime, and when I Sat down alone I felt a regret at leaving you all, that al-moft made melancholy; and as company is the only reSaurce for low Spirits, jl went down in the evening to Mrs. Mortori’s. I •found ihe had a ■party, therefore fauntered home again
in my name
How-
ever the Servant told her, and "Ihe diS-
f	^
fenger
A
, to beg me to return.
I
wreath of friendsHif.
t excuSed my Self, as I felt a little fatigued, but I could not prevail on him to return to the company. He infilled upon Haying to fupper with me. I confeSsI was not Sorry for his resolution, as I never Spend my time more agreeably than with him; but, Julia, men cannot bear encouragement. No, not even the modeft Seymour. He Saw I was pleafed with his company that evening, and he has contrived to come to tea,and Hay every evening fince. I am not aprude,! am fure,yet Such repeated vifits diftreSs me exceedingly ; and I am aware on what fubjedf the conver-ation of this gofliping village may turn. I elleem Mr. Seymour as a friend, and am never more entertained than when converfing with him; he . improves both my mind and heart by Lis good fenfe and many amiable quali-iications, biit as a friend alone I wifli
r.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
217
to view him. Had I been older, or he married, I fliould have thought my-felf particularly fortunate in having fuch a neighbour to dired my lludies and regulate my mind; but he is too young, and too handfome; and tho’ 1
V
^am refolute, the world is unacquainted with my delign of living flngle.
ting to me.
My paper reminds me I mull con» dude. Tell Selina her merit has Secured a firfl place in my heart, and that it will give me infinite pleallire if flie will perform her promife of writ-
Has your perverSe coufin left you yetThe impreflion he made on my imagination will not eafily be effaced; nor will it be a Jhort time that can for a moment banifii the loved •idea of my Julia, from her	i
Eliza Darnley.
LETTER
VoL I.
L
ai8 WRIATH OF FRlTNDSHITj
LETTER XXVI.
MiSs Courtney, to MiSs Darnley*
4	Llvingjlon-Abbey, May
HE privilege, my dear madam, you have given me, of Styling mySelf your friend and correspondent, has-made me too delirous of that plea-fure, to let one opportunity paSs me without improving it.
How Sweet is the name of friend, to one, who like me, has felt the liaid hand of adverSty! yet how little reaSon have ! to complain, bleffed with the prote: • ion ot this fami ly, where the Iludy of every individual in it appears to be only how they may mcreaSe my hap-
pineSs.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
21,
pinels. Lady St.. Clair’s goodneSs to me Sometimes quite over-powers me^ and yet not even to her can I open my heart So Sreely, as I can to you, my dear MiSs Darn ley. Your Soft and Sympathizing nature Seels So fenlibly foi the diftreSs of all your friends, that to (hare in your pity is more than half a cure.
V/hen I firft came here, the only requeft that Lord St Clair made me, was to' be chearful and happy; how much do I regret that it is the only one in the world, that I cannot at all times comply with. F or Ibnte time, wearing the Semblance of mirth, joined
to the Society of my eve> lively Julia,
^ /
ha l made chearfiilneSs So habitual to
I
me, that 1 began to think my natural diSpofition 'vas not fo grave as. 1 Sad
imagined. Lord Wedbury’s attach-
L 2f
ment

220 WREATH OP FRIENDSHIP.
-ment to me has once again plunged me into my former diflrefles. Will you, my dear friend, in this perplexity fa-your me with your advice and confo-lation; will you hold forth your kind protecting hand to guide my erring fteps to the path of reCtitude ? how ought I to aCt? ought I for ever to ba* nilli my Self from his preSence ? for whilst I thus daily fee him and converf© with him, whilft I am hourly a witnefs to fo many proofs of his amiable dif-polition, r cannot behold him with indifference; and whilft I am encouraging liis partiality for me, I am drawing down upon him the wrath of a Father.
How dreadful is that thought, even to me who have never kn iwn the fweets of parental tenderneSs! how diftreflins
is the idea ofaCtLg againft.the witeof
a
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 221
a parent! Heaven forbi4 I Ilioiild ever be the cauSe of making any one guilty of fuch a crime!
Lord St, Clair this morning took me into his library; he told me he was defired by Mr. LeHey to make proposals to me, and was invefted with full power to make fuch Settlements as he and I fhould think proper. I felt my-felf very much embarralTed at this pro* pofal, but requefted he would in as gentle terms as poflible inform Mr. Lelley, that I never could be his. He Seemed very much aftonilhed at my anSwer. ‘‘ Why, my dear Selina, faid he, you cannot have considered this matter properly! you know not half Mr, Lelley’s good qualities, nor how blelTed that woman will be w'ho connects her fate with his. I fliould wilh you to take a little more time to
L 3
re

222 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
refi
Tf
I told him time was unnecef-Saiy, I \¥as quite convinced in my own mind that I never could be happy with him; I fhould be Sorry to do any thing that might give him diipleaSure. ‘‘By no mean% Said he, perhaps iome Sormer attachment: but I will not preSs you too clofe upon the Subjed;; mv love, whatever y ?u do, let it 1>e f >r your own happinels, and you v\iii obli
me.

Shall I make an apology to you, my dea,r MiSs Darnley, for treSpafling So much upon your patience. You fee what you have drawn down upon your-felfby requeiiing me to lay open my whole heart to you ; and yet I hope you will not retraAyotir promiSe of alio wing me to fubcribe myfelf.
Your very fincere friend,
Selina Courtney.
.A
LETTER
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 222
L E T T E R
xxvir
MiSs Darnlev, to Mrs. Scudamore
/

JVamford-Houfe, June 4, 1789.'
I lit
TITH inexprcfilble joy
down to write to my Emily ,*
I flatter my.Self for the lafl time whiKt
file remains in India. 1 have been in
London, have Seen your Eleanor, and
have Spent many hours in talking of
you, my friend. Her accounts are
Such as my heart had earnestly wiShed
to receive, you are well and happy;
and patiently Support that time you are
obliged to continue in India ; a time
however which Ilie alfures me, will
not now exceed a few months : Nay,
that it is even probable you may have
L 4
left
atH WREATH OE TRIENDSHIF*.
left Madras before this letter^ readies^
y
you. l am willing, however, to- riik the IbSs of my time, raider than yon Hiould, for a. moment think me un-kind.
B received your elegant prelents, and accept of them as tokens of your fHendihip, which 1 hopewiH Continue whilft we both have life. Mrs. Den-nifon is juft fuch a woman, as one may ealily ftippofe would endear her-felf to alb who had feen her in the diC treSsful lituations in which you de-feribe her. She is in high Spirits, and laughs and talks with fuch good humour and vivacity, that I regretted I could not prevail upon her to viftt me at Wansfordbut (he would not leave Mr. DenniSon, and bufineft detained him in town*

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 22^
It is impoffible Sor me to defcribe the real pleafme I have in the hope of feeing you, my friend; in once more enjoying your fociety, which I have always efteemed one of the bell blef-. fings heaven can bt;ftow. I anticipate the delight of meeting you after...So Jong an abfence, and a thoufand agree-?-ablefcenes float on my imagination I will not be denied the pleafure of your company and Mr. Scudamore's at Wansford, the. moment you arrive.

My houle<ougl|t tobe confldered by
come
you asr your then my Efnily*^ and grace thdfe fcenea you To mucteadmire. . If you* will hot linger, perhaps' you may honour the nuptials oT, your, friend , by your
Don't flart,' Efliily: remember I am but a weak womans and my resolutions
.D5

■S.
V k
226 WREA.THOF FRIENDSHIP.
as changeable as tlioSe of moft o£ my . Sex. But one word I niuSt Say in nay own deSence. When I determined to
4
live fingle, it. was beeauSe the gentlemen I had Seen did not equal my ex.-peOation, neither did it appear to me that any oS them could make me hap,-py; but this objeOiion is removed. I have at laft become acquainted with a gentleman., So amiable both in his characler and behaviour, So much bcr loved by the world, and So attentive and affedionate to me, that if I ftiU were to perfifl; in refuSing him, what at firft deServed the name of reSolutionj^
would be now obstinacy.
V:
But come, and you Shall yourSelf judge of the merit of Mr, Seymour. I will not Say one word more in his favour. When you are acquainted with,.
him
It
\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 227
him, I am certain yoii will approve of the choice of your friend,
E. Darnlev.

L E T T E R XXVIII. MiSs Darnley, to MiSs Courtney.
Wansford.Houfey yane 6y
OUR letter, my Senna, was a true emblem of your heart, and, as Such, welcome to the boSom of friendlhip. .
I .regret extremely the perplexities which Mr. Lefley’s offer has thrown you into; but I flatter mySelf in the end they will prove fortunate. The goodneSs of your own heart w ill lead
YOU
228
WREATH OF' IENOSHIFt
I •-
you to walk fteadily in the path of reditude, and that you know, is the Sure road to happinefs*
You defire me to give you my advice: I Ihould have infinite pleaSure in doing it, if you had occafion for any ;, but few young people are better qua-, lifted to judge for tliemSelves than you,, my friend; yet to prove to you how
ready I Ihould be to oblige you, if I
%
had it in my power, one thing I will' adviSe, and that is, to make Lady St. Clair acquainted with LordWeftbury*s attachment to you. Her tendernefs over you, and care for your welfare, entitles her to exped fuch a return; v befide ., it will be a relief to youc own mind; for whilft you are ading under the eye of So amiable a lady, you will ' have the fatisfadion of knowing: that you are fulfilling the wilhes of yow bed friend.
WREATH CF FRTENDSHIF.
229
I am afraid T have impofed a hard talk, but Lady Julia's alfedlion for you will lead her to point out the leaft painfiil way of conSuking her mother j *tho* Julia is lively and w/// make us all feel the Sallies of her wit Sometimes, yet her heart is blelSed with the Softeft' Sympathy, and 1 am Sure you may with Safety trull your Secret in her

r think my Self highly obliged by« the confidence you have placed in me, and allure yourfelf at all times an in-s tereft in my heart, thk« time, or ehange of fituation, can never alter. I Should have inhnite pleafure. in Seeing' you . at Wansford-Houfe> and thoS)
Lady St. Clair absolutely refuSed you and my Julia to me atuprefent,? I will' hope .on Some future day to have That happineSs j at ali^tinjes^t. my amiable
yoiwig;

230 WREATH OF FRIEND'SHIF.’
young friend, look on my houfe as a home, where you will meet with a heart truly Senlible of your merit, and arms open to receive you.
To Shew you, my dear Selina, how much I value your confidence,. I am going in my turn to acquaint with a fecret which I have Scarce ventured to whiSpereven to myfelf. You may recolleO, when I was at Livingfiion, hpw unmercifully Julia rallied me,, on living in what flie calls a ftate of maid-iSm ; it is an old Subje(5t of conversation, tho’ I confeSs I never felt it So painful before. The love of retire-, inent has been the leading wilh of my heart ever fince I had reafon Sufficient to form a wilh; I do not mean by retirement, a Solitary oxiftence without one friend and comforter, but a life pf
reafon, Such as is deScribed by Thomp- ,
fon«

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 2
3^
Son, whe''e he Says, knew he but his happineSs, of man the happieft, he who from the crowd retired, &c. &c.’^
As I had it in my power to fix my refidence where I chofe, the country appeared to^me moft likely to pro?-diice that happinefs I was in. Search of, A companion was the next thing Ifound mySelf in.,want of.; A hulband was certainly the, moft likely to be choSen by a young woman in my fituar tion. But tho’. I. had many offers, which by the world would be called eligible, my heart was,, flill my. own; moft of the gentlemen that addreffed me had views and fehemes. of life So different from what I had formed, that I determined to remain as I now am; and refolved, ifl Should never have it in my power to perforin thofe adive
duties
Z^Z WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
duties of wife and mother, I might at leaft be Serviceable in other refpeds to my fellow creatures.
My
fubje61:
S
thought no temptation could prevail upon me to alter it. 1 have lived however to prove how' weak female resolutions are, when they concern affections of the hieart. I have Spent much time with Mr. Seymour, ( who you kjpiow is Mr, Drummond’s friend ) and find his ideas fo exaCUy Suited to my own, that in fpite. of all- my refo-
pleafei'd with
1
I
h i
every reafon in the world to flatter my--felf that the attachment is mutual; and have no doubt * that with him I ^ experience all'the happinefe: ,which fency has formed, and whicli To Tel-dom has been brought into\ real
life.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 233
—
Pray tell Julia, and bid her fpare her friend, who loves you and her
with truth and tendernefs. Your^s ever,
’ ♦
E. Earnhy.
LETTER XXIX.
Mrs. Scudamore, to Mifs Darnley^
M
Madrasy March 1,1787.
Y laft letter to you, my dear friend, was concluded in fuch hafte, and written in Such agitation of mind, that I have Some doubts of its being intelligible. But I could not part with Kleanor without great emotion, knowing the jC>c>r/ She was bound to; and that it would be in my calendar many long months e’re we Ihould meet again.
The
234 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIF.
I
The charge Oie left me with too^ was in a ftate that called forth all my companion, and the fuffedngs She has lince endured, have endeared her to me, as it feemed entirely to arife from her alTeftion for Mrs. Dennifon and her little one. For one whole month I w.atdied over her bed without any hopes of her recovery; her con-ftitution at laft Surmounted the fury of her disorder, and fne is now able to walk about, and to fit an hour or two in my apartment every day.
After the Scene which I defcribed to you in my laft, we thought it bed fhe Should be unacquainted with the hour of their departure, as believing her weak Spirits would not bear the fliock of fepaiation. For once our humanity led us into an error; for her diftreSs on hearing her fiiends were gone, beg-
gared
WREATH OF FRIINDSHIP. 2J5
gated all deScription; and I believe Ihc would have borne the ceremony of taking leave with more fortitude than fhc did this fatal intelligence. I was quite unequal to the fight of Such poignant for row, and left her to the care of her country-women, who, were moll of them as little calculated for comforters as myfelf.
'I'his poor Sufferer has employed all my thoughts and attention fince we firft met, and it has been a matter of a-ftonifhment to many of my acquaintances,That I fhould decline gay parties and brilliant afiTemblies, for the Sake of adminiftering conSolation to a poor dependant; who, (when I tell them I believe fhe has experienced a variety of misfortunes) are fo very charitable, as to think Ihe had better die and So end them. I flatter mySelS, however, that

226
WREATH OF FRIENHSHiFi
I have preserved her life for Some good purpofe; at leaft 1 have the fatisfadion to think I have been doing my duty, and fulfilling Some of the intentions of; my creation.
1 have never yet dared to afk Orixana for any account of her life, fearful to open a wound which feems ready to bleed at the moft delicateLtouchv I cannot bear to gratify my own curi-olity at the expence of any one^s feete ings. Some time perhaps w'hen her health is better eftablilhed, when fhe has known.me long enough to treat me with confidence, and believes I am worthy of it, and when Ihe herfelf may willi to unburthen her heart of Some of its Sorrows. I may learn the concurring circumflances that have brought her at laft under my protection ; where I do hope the unpleafant
part
WREATH OF FRIEiTDSHIP.
237
part of her life has had its termination. Itismywifti, tho* not always in my power, to make every one happy around me.
A truce at prefent to this melancholy fubjed:. Let me give you an account of a vifit I made yellerday to a country woman of your's, a Mrs. Long, who with her hufband is juft arrived. He had been in India ibefore, and having Spent the greateft part ci what he carried from thence, is come back to re-imhurfe, and has brought over a little wife, about fi xteen, who is in high spirits, and delighted with the fplendor of her houfe and the inumber of her iervants.
My firft enquiry in this country, after compliments have pafled, is, ‘*from what part of England are you
come ? **
a? 8
WREATH OF FRIFNCSHIP.
come?” You will gueSs the pleaSure it gave me, to find Mrs. Long had lived ‘‘ in the neighbourhood of Wansford.” I did not delay a moment to enquire after MiSs Darnley, and waited with all the eager expedlation of friendlhip for an account of one So dear to me; but (he informed me that you were not personally acquainted, tho’ So near neighbours, ^‘You were very lingular in many things, and lo unfafhfna leyhcr: Marna did not chooSethe acquaintance; for you kept very little company be-fides the reffory the curate, and their zvives; and mama Said indeed there was very little to be learned from one who affociates with Such people, un-leSs indeed it was a receipt for a prim-roSe pudding, or cow flip wine; and as it was not likely Iliould ever need thoSe acconiplijhmen^ty Ihe would not
take off our attention from thoSe mo
elegant
rc

wBeath of friendship
2%C)
•?
eJed.mt dcamretnents nefe^ary for everf woman of fafriion that is intended to live in the world.”
• \
m	s	’	*	^
Yon may believe,Eliza,how indignant
I was, and how i delpifed yompanegy~ r^. “But Surely, my dear Madam, I
Mil
highly educated, and poireifes every accomplilhi neiit neceffary to adorn the moll exalt d Station.” “ Perhaps So, but my Mama always gave us Such an idea of her, that I had not the lead de-
»
lire to fee her. The men fay She is
%
handfome, but She treats them all with fuch a civil indifference, that the number of her lovers will never be great. Indeed, Long told me on our voyage, that he had lome idea of her himlelf, but from the accounts he had of her he was convinced She would nevei m ke the figure he ihould wiSh his wife to do,
fb
A ^
\
«

\
A
\
£40 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
fo never went to Wansford; and if lie fiad I fuppofe he would have found her with her poultry; hearing the village children their catechifm; or making caudle for fome poor lady in the flraw.


^2
I left Mrs. Long without attempting your juftification;, convinced, that the moft ftudied eulogium could not have painted your charader in higher or more amiable colours than this little fatyrift, with her childilh cenfure.

Goon, my bell Eliza, in this excellent plan, begun fo nobly indefiance of the pleafures and fedu6Uons of the world, and continued in defiance of the calumnies of the ignorant and weak. I am, ever your’s,
RS,
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
of Pa.
Library
f
/

I *
t
/	%■ 'I
■.
\ .
/
/
i.
' >

. \
i

«■ ^
/
V - ,
\




^ V" V
W. O 1
/^\ /"V /

■VSKf


•s . S

*fc».
•4-
\
LEVINA FOSTER

THE
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER
gr-

• \

*" /
f	)
A

\ •
X


THE
W R E A T H
O F
FRIENDSHIP

O R,
%
A RETURN FROM
I N D I
A
A NOVEL,
IN A SERIES OF LETTERS

PRODESSE ET DELECTAREs
Jl/I
IN THREE VOLUMES

VOL. II.

LONDON;
PRINTED FOR
WILLIAM LANE, LEADENHALL-STREET.
M DCC XC.
'S' v'.

r-
i-

/■
•:^se

- A Ah.

iV^

\A
« /<-
. r '■■'^^*
ji.


■^s
0'
N u.» .
U. of Pa.
Library
(fl (d
03Z
03^
C3
r N K
*
'iSr R JE t It
b P
9
klENDSniF

LETTER XXX.
jii/D Ilarcoarty to Mils DarnK)\
Livingjion-Abbey, Lune 9.
Have juft received your letter, my dear Eliza, and atii truely rejoiced
and
>
y that you arrived Safe at home
found all your friends well.
i	^
\
i K ^
' ^
>
0
vJ
d
Mte regret your abSence much; but I . cannot help remarking your very great anxiety to be gone. What could it ■arife from.?’ You Say our Society wa.r> more agreable than ever, and that you fliould have liked to have Spent a little
•I
4
<1
Vol. IL

raor^‘
"I ft s '/J
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
more time in ciflltivating Selina’s friendihip. Pray,-my dear, what prevented your Spending a little more time?” could not the family at home diSpenfe longer with your abSence? or, perhaps you were not able to
4
bear Drummond’s noiSe? none of that will do, my dear Eliza, you may as well confeSs honeftly at once,
f
that tho’ like Troy you have flood a ten ' year’s hege, ( for I verily bel ieVe the men commenced bv ertures to you at fixteen ) you are obliged to capitulate at lafl; and after refufing fb many men of high birth, and wonderful atchievements, you are going to bellow yourSelf upon a clerical lover. He is likewise a phoenix of his kind; Drummond fays he is endowed with every virtue under Heaven. How happy, a woman are you to meet with
fuch
WREATH OF FRIENDSHtP.
3
Such a friend in theSe times of dif*
V
. fipatioii ?
It would be rather extraordinary if
arguments we
O
you and I were to change chara<5lcrs, and yet I am half inclined tothink it.will be So; it would only be convincing
s
each other with the
> f
X	V	,
each have uSed, for I have Some thoughts of living lingle; and it ap-
j
pears very plain to me that you arc bound with a freQi gale and a Strong current to the port of matrimony.
I do not like, Eliza,the charge you bring againft me of gravity; it is unjuft, believe me, and ill founded : you
i..
are the only perSon in the w-orld that ever made the observation; and I am very apt to believe it has only been in Some of your penlive moments, when you have been lighing for the joys ol
B 2
Wansford
4
WREATH OP FRIENDSHIP.
S
VVansford, that you have beheld me withajanndiced eye. If I am to be an old maid, I will not be a grave one. , I am determined to exhibit the charadleT in a new light, and not look with a grudging eye on my young friends who are enjoying life all around me. I will make parties for the young and the gay, and when I am too old to enjoy the fprightly dance or Song mySelf, I will participate the plealure by beholding the chearful group of happy mortals, that are frilking by my fide.
TheSe are the pleafures I Shall have while )'ou are all anxiety about the education of your family and the peace of your hufband., More rational will your empdoyment be, I confefs; but we niLifl all be content with the condition that is allotted us in this world;
and
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.

and I am now well convinced it is not mine to Iliare in the pleaSures of connubial happinefs. There is but m\e man of all I ever Saw, with whom I could willi to partake the joj s and cares of life, and he is ot her wife en» gaged; this may perhaps appear furpiL ling to you, but So it is.
Yeflerday evenin
her
5»
:e engaged in playing a rub-
; the remaming party were in a different part of the room. ’We had difcourfed on various Subjecls; the converlation inSenfibly turned on private and long engagements; Drummond was exprefling his disapprobation of them in warm terms, when
Selwin interrupted him, and with a
%
great deal more paffion than good breeding in his manner, Said, “it ill be-
BS
came
6
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
came Mr. Drummond to Speak on Such a Subjeft, who had not only entered into a long and Solemn engagement with an ‘ amiable woman in a neighbouring kingdom, but was likewiSe endeavouring to Seduce the afFe6:ions oS the finell woman in his own, with
I
no other view than to leave her in the Same wretched manner to deplore her credulity.^*
Drummond was rouSed by this un-expedled attack into very great warmth, and replied, that he did not understand what he meant by talking to him in that Strain, and begged leave to tell him he would not bear ite* ‘dSyou do not underhand. Sir, Said Selwin, I will be a little more explicit, tho’ I think you cannot be ignorant that I mean Mademoiselle Sanzey.; and as to your
not bearing it, it is a matter of very
little
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
-a >
7
little conSequence to me whether you will or no, as I never make alTertions of any kind, that I am not at all times ready to Support.^*
t
Drummond was about to reply in a very high tone, when Lefley interrupted them by faying, he muft take the liberty to remind them, they were in the company of ladies. He immediately ceafed, and making a moft grace*^ ful inclination with his head to Lefley, faid, ‘‘ I thank you, Mr. Lefley, I was indeed very near forgetting whofe company I was in; but I beg pardon of thefe ladies, and fince you have thus kindly recalled us to reafon, we will for the prefent drop the fubjefl.’* He then with infinite addrefs gave the converfation a new turn, and they all contributed their fhare to Support it; all hwtmyfelf, and indeed, Eliza, lam
B 4
almoll
s:
WREATH OF FRIRNDSHIF
almoft aShamed of discovering my^ weakneSs even to you; but for Some time I found mySelf utterly unable to articulate the lead Sentence^ nor could I recover my fpirits fo far as to be tolerably chearful the whole evening. And yet it was not the idea of Ma-demoiSelle Sanzey, that tormented me, for I lincerly wilh Drummond happy let his choice be w'here it will; but the fear of thefe two gentlemen quarrelling. Heaven knows where it will end! As Soon as our vifitors left us, we retired to our apartments, but not to reft; not one moment have I Slept all the night. I am diftraeded with different ideas, and know not what meafure to take. I dare not tell my father, for that would draw his anger upon Drummond inftantly. I wifh I could have fpoken to Lord Weftbury, he might
perhaps have interfered. I have more
than
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
9
than once had thoughts of breaking
t
thro^ all the rules of decorum, and writing a card to him to intreat him to prevent their meeting; but Selina begs So pitioufly that I will not engage in the quarrel, that I have given up that Scheme. Selwin has not yet left his room, fo hitherto all is Safe, .
When I began this letter I did not intend laying one word on this Subjecf, as I knew it would hurt you; but my pen and thoughts can dwell on no ocher: and now how much'do I widi you were here, for never hill now was your ad* vice io neceiiary to .
Your diStreifed Friend,
Julia Hcircourt.
LETTER.

lo
WREATH OF FRIENDSHI?*
LETTER XXXI.
Iiord Iffjlhury, to the Rev. Edward.
K
Seymour,
JVeJihilry-Lodgey yune 12.-
Dear Sir,
Take up the^ pen of my friend, who is unable of himSelf to make uSe of it, to inform you in zvhat a moment your lall letter was prefented to him.
It appears from the date of it, that it ought long ago to have been in his poITeiTion; but having been dire ded under cover to my father, he by Some unaccountable negledt did not give it
to
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
II
to Mr. Drummond hill this morn ing.
You may perhaps have heard from, MiSs Darnley of a quarrel between Mr.
m
Selwyn and our dear friend; I flattered myfelf I had put a Hop to their proceeding to any fatal lengths, but the hypocriSy of Mr. Selwyn deceived me, and I thought him fatisfied by my accommodation; whilft he Still nourished that, horrid principle, re:? venge..
He contrived to have a ■ note con* veyed to Drummond unknown to me; this note, couched dn. the moil inSo* lent terms j demanded immediate Satif-fadtion An anSwerwas as Secretly returned,appointing fix o’clock on VVed- -neSday morning as the time, and a. clofe walk in LivingSton Park as ihc-
place.
12 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
place. They were both, I believe, punftiial, and met entirely unattended, each burning with reSent-
Till this day I have never learnt how this affair was conducted. Mr. Drummond has been utterly incapable of giving any account of his own miS-fortune, and they had no wkneffes. He awaked about Seven o’clock this morning, calm and Senlible, and has delired me to inform you of all the circumftances he can recollect. He was himfelf the firft on the ground, and when Selwyn arrived a very fhort diftance was marked out. At his defire his enemy fired firft, and lodged his ball in the left fhoulder of our friend, who fell, and was left in this condition by his cowardly anta-onift j who- waited not for Ms fire,
but



WREATH OF FR I ENDSHIP.
13
blit made the belt oS his way over the park paling, and has not yet been heard of, tho’ I have had people in Search of him in many places.
In this condition remained my poor couSin, till the park-keeper, by great
■y
accident, came to the Spot where he lay bleeding. He was ftill fenfible, and requefted him to procure Some atTiftance, but on no account to alarm the family at the Abbey. The man was true to his orders, and came diredly to me with this fad news. You may be Sure I was not
and with all the help I could mufter in
%
So Ihort a time, few to his Succour. He was entirely infenfibie to pain, or the inconvenience of being moved,
and thoCve have h id the betl furrieons
'.-A
the country could afford, they have-not, with ail their united fkilL y et
traded
V XJU
14
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
tra6led the ball. But as bis fever is Something abated, I hope all may yet may be well.
It is not above an hour ago I left
O
him, that I might write a letter upon buiineSs, and in that time, my father
paid him a vilit, and gave him*, your
%
letter, alking his forgivenefs for having forgot it fo long. Would to heaven he had Hill kept it, or given it.
V
to him a week ago! then thoSe excellent admonitions might have prevented the fatal conSequences of paf-fion unreftrained by reaSon. 1 hank. God he has bo:ne the reading of it better than could be ex c eded, and calls me to tell you, he loves and ho-nou. s you more than ever; that it Ihall ' have its due weight with him ; that he will read it till every word be engraved upon his heart I. it Ihall lie .:
upon,
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
tf
15
%
upon his pillow, and be his conftant monitor; and fo long as- his reaSon
continues, he will endeavour to recoiled and pradice the virtues you inSpire.
He wilhes to See you, to convince you that his mind ftili retains that integrity you own it once polSeired; that he lubmits without repining to
the will of providence, whatever are its
*
decrees. Still he is not So calm as before, and his fever Seems inclinable to return. I have much pain in communicating to you this unwelcome intelligence, but it is conftantly the lot
of humanity toiuffer for ourfelves or others.
I know nothing of the family at Livingdon, never having left the bed-fide of my friend; love now yields entirely
i6
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
tirely to friendfliip; I think you may
V
polTibly hear of them thro* MiSs Darnley.
I have Sent to Sir Henry and Lady Drummond, and told them in the tendereft manner I could, the indif-polition of their Son, without hinting at the caufe. I tremble at the Scene they have to witnefs, as I am certain if they are, well they will Soon be here.
I ’will write again the firfl leifurc moment; till then 1 leave you to comment on this falhionable but horrid method of redreffing injuries, be they
s
real or imaginary. I remain, with the * utmoft reSped, dear Sir, your moft, . ©bedient and affedionate,
IVeUburv^
\

LETTER
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. FT
LETTER XXXII

V
Lady Julia Harcourts to MiSs Darnky,
LivingJion~Abbey, June 14.
The fears I exprdfed to you, my
dear Eliza, at die condulion of-my laft letter, are all reduced to a dreadful certainty. Drummond, theac-complilhed Drummond, is now Ian-, guilhing on the bed of licknefs, brought to this deplorable date by the ralh hand of Selwyn; and your Julia the cauSe, tho’ the innocent one, of all this misfortune.
Oh, my friend, you know not how
much I have Suffered ! how much I do
%
Suffer..
-a ^
1 a
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
Suffer. The dehre I have to conceal it from my friends makes it a thouSand:
times more
ul to me. It has hi-
therto been, and I hope it will ever be my Study, to be the conftant cauSe of pleaSure to my amiable parents, but now indeed, the talk is a hard one; labouring as I am under the moft poignant anxiety, I cannot even in their preSence at all times Support my-Self. Selina is a great confolation to me ; to her I can, with the moft un-
I
bounded confidence, lay open my whole heart; we mingle our tears for • the Sufferings of poor Drummond, and not Seldom Shed a few Sympathizing drops, for the diftreffes of Ma-demoiSelle Sanzey. Oh ! Eliza! if
She really loves him, and who can
\
doubt it, how much do I feel for
her ?
The
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
19
The pradice of duelling appears to me in So very Shocking and odious a light, that I think it muft hurt the feelings of any woman, to have the man, whom above all others. She loves ■and efteems, engaged in an affair of that kind. I will endeavour as much as poffible, to colled my Scattered thoughts, and tell you the little, th^ very little, I know of this horrid affair.
As Soon as I had finished my letter,. Selina and mySelf went down Stairs, perfedly aSfured that Selwyn had not left his room ; but how much were we furprized, upon making enquiries in
I
the breakfafi; parlour, to find he had been out for above an hour. My fears were then So great that I could not conceal them, and my father inftantly observing the change in my countenance.
\
20'
WREATH OF FRIENTSHIF.
nance, afked with great earneftnefs, what could have diliurbed me So -much,’^ I told him there had been a quarrel the night before between Mr.-
Drummond and Mr. Selwyn, and from the v/armth of both tempers, I apprehended the moll fatal confequences.
i.
4
My father Seemed to take the alarm, and was altnofl as unealy as myfelf; but while we were debating what was proper to be done, Selwyn walked into the room, I loft all power over _myfelf, and ranning to him Seized hold of his arm, and exclaimed, with
vehemence imaginable, - tell me, Selwyn, inftantly tell me, where you have left Drummond; and whether you have left him in good health, or Suffeiung from yoiir. ralli-
He flared at me, and with the
mod
tne
neSs.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
C I
fang froid replied,
“.good heavens !
pofllble, that the idea, the mere idea of Mr. Drummond’s being in dangej', can have raiSed theSe terrible emotions in your bread,; I am happy I can inform you, that your admired friend is well, and will, I make no doubt think himfelf under great obligations to you, for the anxiety you havefbewn for his welfare.” You may believe I returned to my Seat with no leSs precipitation than I left it. My father then made dme enquiries if any thing further had palfed between them. He faid they had met, but that Lord Weftbury, who was indeed .an excellent young man, had conciliated matters, and he believed they were tolerably Satisfied. My father then read a long harangue on duelling,.rafhneSs, &c. &c. which I
ana
22
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
am Sorry to Say, had little effe£l upon.
iiim.
After breakfaft the Lelleys left us. We Spent the day without company ; Selwyn was apparently in better Spirits and better temper than he had been for Some time paft. When we aroSe the next morning, we were not at all fur-prized to hear he had been gone out to ride for two or three hours; it was not an unufual thing with him to Spend his mornings in that manner,and we were all lulled into Such a peaceful Security, that I dare fay there was not one of us had the lead appreheniion of what was to follow.
When we were alTembled in the drawing room before dinner, exped:* ing Mr. Selwyn’s arrival, a Servant
brought
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
23
Lrouglit a note to my father, it v;’as •nearly in the following words:
Mr. Drummond and myfelf have
.0
V W
fought, he is wounded, I bell dangeroully ; before this reaches you I ■Ihall be on my way to the continent; all purfuit will be in vain. Allow me to return thanks to you, my Lord, for your repeated a6ts of civility to me. The amiable Lady St. Clair likewiSc requires my warmeft acknowledge- •
ments. Tell Lady Julia, it is 011 her account alone that I am banilhed from .my country for ever.
George Selwyn.”
To my Eliza I need not endeavour
» ' •
to paint my feelings at that moment; you will readily believe the painful fenfations that at once affailed me, and In an inllant discovered to me the whole melancholy Scene in its moll
difmal
24
W-REATH OT FRIENDSHIP.

diSmal colours. My -Sorrows at that time were not of long continuance, for my father had fcarce fini'flied the reading of his billet, when I funk fenfe-leSs into-my chair. The kind affift-ance of my friends in a Ihort time re-flored me to my recolledtion, but not ■to tranquility; nor can I ever know one moment’s peace till Drummond is pronounced out of danger. Oh! my Eliza! how have a few Short hours ruined the Smiling proSpe£ts of your friend ? how many flattering Scenes of future bliSs had I formed in rny Sanguine imagination, that are now forever obliterated ! I fee the fervant returning, who has been making an enquiry after Mr. Drummond’s health this morning. May we receive a favourable account! I will not conclude my letter till I have heard it; and may you, my Eliza, never feel the agitation
that

WREATH OF FRlil^DSHl?.
that labours in my breaft at this
moment.
MiSs Comdne) in cOntlnuafion.
f
My poor Julia’s diftreSs has rendered her altogether unfit to add one
»
Word more. 1 have therefore under-
%
taken to conclude and fend away her letter; but how Sorry ami to give you
«v
So much pain, my dear MiSs Darntey, as to inform you Mr. Drummond.is much worSe this morning, and his fever higher than ever it has been.
Sir Henry and Lady Drummond are arrived, and - the Phyficians have fcarce a hope remaining. The Servant fays he never Saw fuch a feene of diftreSs; there is not a creature in the houSe that can Speak without tears.
Vol. IL
C
Drummond
/
A
f
i6
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Drummond is univerSally beloved; he certainly has, under his volatile appearance, more benevolence and good humour than is generally to be met with. I cannot however acquit him in this affair, he certainly has not behaved with honour; there can be mo doubt of his engagement to.MademoiSelle San-zey, and yet, jfvu and J both agreed when -you were here (and it has been much more vifible lince) that his attachment appeared to be very ftrong for Lady Julia.
Poor girl! what will become of her? She is juft now reclined upon a fopha by me, languid and motionlefs, with-out the leaft appearance of exiftence, were it not for the big tears that roll inceffantly down her pallid cheeks.
. She is fo much afraid that Lord and Lady St. Clair, or indeed any one
Ihould
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIF t.f
flionld discover her love for Drurn-
mond, that it is only when we arc alone fhe will give a full teope to her grief; and I am fure the concealment hurts her. How often in the hour of did refs has fhe Soothed my afflidlion, and yet how unequal do I find my-felf to adminifter the fame confolation in return.
r'
S
I have received your friendly letter, my dear MiSs Darnley; it Ihould not have been fo long unnoticed, had not this unhappy affair taken poffeflion of my whole heart. I find there is not a more effectual way to banifh our own refledions than to fliare in the diftrefs
of a friend. But no time or circum-
»
fiances can ever make me forget with
O
how much fincerity I am your truly affedionate friend,
Selina Courtney.
C%	WETTER
^8	• WREA'TH OF ^FRIEKDSHIP

L E T T E R XXRIII.
h%cv .EdwardSeymour^to Lord.Wefthury
fVansford, yane 14.
Received your Lordihip’s letter, and
am
the dreadful account you give me of my poor friend. I would inftantly fly to offer every afliftance in my power, were I not convinced that my attempts are entirely unneceffary, as he is particularly fortunate in the attention of So kind a friend as your Lordfhip. You will excuSe me for adding, that I
have long from charader had a high
/
efteem for your Lordfhip; and your
/
attachment to poor Drummond proves the goodneSs of your heart. His many amiable qualities mull endear Iiim to
all
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
29
all who know him. You have promISed, my Lord, to write to me again; on that hope I rnull endeavour to reft Satisfied with my diftance*
The friendftiip which SubSifts between us has been uninterrupted and fteady for many years; we were Schoolfellows and play-fellows from our earlieft days. With how much tender-neSs I love him my agonizing feelings at this moment can witnefs*
You regret, my Lord, that your father gave him my letter at fuch a time; but I have a ftilldeeper fourep of Sorrow; that letter Ihould have been written many weeks fooner. I have been acquainted with his growing af-feftion for Lady Julia Harcout from the firft moment he Saw her, and was not ignorant ofhis engagement abroad;
C3
I

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIF^
I have had many proofs of the influence I have overhimj how dreadfuLtheh muft my refle6tions be>, when by one-word fpoken in time, I might have preserved a dear friend from a crime of fb black a dye, and perhaps from the grave. That thought, my Lord, carries-w ith it a torture more fevere than I can well bear»
MiSs Darnley has had no letter yet from Lady Julia; I have not informed her of this dreadful accident, as it might alarm her for her friend, who I greatly fear will fuIFer violently on this occaSion. I am not forry Selwyn ef-caped your Lordfhip*s fearch. Is he not a relation of Lady Julia, and would not any difgrace which he might have Suffered have fallen hard on the worthy Lord St. Clair ? Selwyn’s crimes are of fo dark a nature that they mull for ever
destroy
r
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
rt \
deftroy his peace, and banifh tranquillity from his breaft. I am in Such real -affliction, that your Lordihip mull' excuSe the incoherence of my ^ ideas. ;-
I have only to beg your gcodheSs in writing to me Such accounts of my friend’s fituation as may Occur,which I (hall always acknowledge as the high-eft obligation.^
I am, &c.
E. Sevmour,
G4
isETTER
WREJlcTH OF FRIENBSHT?
L E T T E R XXXIV.
iirv, tO'the Rev. E. Seymottr.
WeJihuryrLdgii *^me 15*.
My Lear Sir,
Take the very firli opportunity of performing the promiSe I made ta you in my lafb letter. Sincerely do I wifh that it was in my power to give -a more favourable account of Mr. Drummond, than I am now able; but fine® that time we have beea conftantly ,alarmed with very frightful fymptomsi^ ^id tho’ for the lad twenty-four hours fia has flept a good deal, yet very faint are our hopes. Tho’ naturally ancUned p look on the bright fide, the pi<dure before me fo very dark, that
i
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
<9
I am now no longer fanguine; and I find fortitude is much eafier in theory than pradice. Sir Henry and Lady Drummond came as I cxpeded on-the wings of fear and impatience, and arrived here two days ago* They both appear to poiTeSs So much resignation , and unaffefted piety, that they- bore v the narrative I had- prepared for them^ better than I expededi h Lady Drum^* mond Shewed Some marks’ of impa-tience on. being; told She could not
O
then fee her Son, whoSe agitation was -at that time fo great that I was afraid, the interview might injure both. . .


I
It’was always my ■ intention to con-
ceal from them
7/e
Drummond-s dllneSs; I thought this little piece of deceit allowable, (if
deceit can ever be So) but my father.

who
34
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
who is not always to be controuled, and who does not See events in the light f do, by hints, ( which I in vain endeavoured to wave ) gave them to undeifland, that moj^ remained to be told; and I found it impolhble ' longer to keep the Secret. Now im deed they Suffered! and I am Sure they bould not have experienced a greater Ihock, had they vvitneffed his diffo-lution. They have So juft an abhorrence to this mode cS revenging in-^ fulls, that did not in this caSe the crime carry along with it the punifh-ment, their cenSure of their Son’s con-dud would be very Severe ; but ten-derneSs takes the lead of every othcR feeling.
I found it beft ^to attend Lady Drummond to the flck room, as Soon as I could hear that all was quiet. I
alTifted
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 3,5
aflifted her, with trembling fteps, to afcend the flairs; at the door of the apartment fhe flopped and Said, “let me here try to gain a little reSoliition before I encounter this awful Scene; affifl me, kind heaven, as thou >hafl ever done ; and pardon me if I fhbuld breathe a repining figh j’r-aftef a pauSe flie added, “I Submit to thyi will." We entered the room, ! gently tHeiv afide the; curtain-, ..Drummond raiSed his - languid eyes, but haflily telofed them again, -and ■ covering his face with his hand, cried, ‘‘Charles! what is that phantom- thou leaded to me I kiiow it, It is RoSaUalcbme ito up« braid me with her wrongs. ' See ! See'! what angry glances die darts ;on 'her aithleSs.lover ! Shield me rfi-om thoSe piercing looks,-, and telL her ifI live 1 will dill be her’s, whatever may. be the confequence.


V
■
♦
•s.
jT- A

r-

I
a
WREATH OP FEriNTSHIF.
.
N
Lady Drummond at my requeft retired to another part of the room in agonies inexpreffible; I returned to footh my friend. I graSped his hand, and fenfible of the prelSure, he Said, cruel Charles^ why affli£I me now with: the preSence of one I dare not think ofI aflured him it was not. Rofalia, that it was his fond,, his ate-fedionate mother, come to admini-fterhealth and comfort. ‘^My Mother! -what a light for her! but where is She?; come my dear parent, and bleSs your ,
fon. Tell him that yovF forgive him, tho* there are in the world who will not fay So, tho’ he bleeds before them.’^ His- head leaned^
■wpon her bofom; her tears fell upon *;.
/
his face; but he was once more, in--fenfible to Sorrow.
unw
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 37'
r
Lady Drummond has Sat by him night and day. He often raves of RoSalia, and Sometimes in a whiSpec calls on Lady Julia but as if fearfuh of being heard. This is the ftate we: are in at prefent. We are certain of your pity, and alSo of your prayers. You Shall hear from me again the firft moment of a change. Believe me your. ^tfiliiTed, but very fincere.

ly ^|li< I .

f •
L L T T E R
Mrs,-Scutiamore, to MiSs Darnley,
Madras. March
HO’ I wrote to you only a few days agOj my SEliza, yet as J kad an opportunity offending you tkc
inciofcd
38
wreath OF FRIENDSHIP*
iiicIoSed I was determined not to loSc it. In looking over Some papers I found a copy of a letter Sent by Mr. Scudamore to his brother; as I am Sure the ftory and the lingularity of the events will amufe a Speculative mind like your’s, I will make no .apology for wi iting So Ihort a letter, which I have not now time to enlarge. Mr. Man-deville left India laft Summer, and you will agree with me he deferves to
be happy.
Your’s, ever.
D.
Licnel Scudamore^ Efq. to
Efq.
Madras
9
HER E are Some-circumstances in liiiraan life which have So
nudi the appearange- pf qhaiice, that
in
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
39
in that word of no meamng men are apt to overlook the influence of a Superior power. That I have Some reafon for making this observation you Ihall yourfelf be a judge; when I relate an event, which, without the interpofi-lion of a friendly arm, might. have proved fatal to me. .
A few days ago 1 h^d occafion to pafs near the company’s garden. My bufi-nefs had detained me' longer than 1 expected, So that by the time 1 reached that placey night had come on with more than ordinary darknefs; which was rendered ftill more difmal, by ? a thicket thro’ which I was. to pafs. In the midSt of this Solitude I was travelling leifurely forward^ and indulging an i agreeable melancholy which Such Scenes Seldom fail to in-fpire; my meditations were Soon interrupted
40
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
rupted by Something rulliing Srom the wood; and before I had time to discover the cauSe, I felt a blow upon my temple which brought me to the ground.
How long I continued in this litu* ation I am unable to fay. When my SenSes returned I found mySelf Seated on the ground. Surrounded by Several
f
people with lanterns; one'. ,of whom tho’ Irimfelf wounded, Seemed parti- : cularly folicitous for my recovery. By the care and affiftance of theSe good people I was removed to a neighbouring houSe, and a Surgeon Sent for, who pronounced my cafe, tho’ dangerous, not mortal; for, belides the blow-which had deprived meof my fenfes, < I difcovered a wound in ‘ myf* fide; to prevent apy alarming apprehenfidns in my wife, 1 had recoliedion-enough to
1.

WREATH OF TRIENDSHIP
42
dispatch a Servant to inform her that buSineSs detained me a day longer in the country ; and before the conclulion* of the next day, I found myfelf able to return home, tho’ not quite well, yet, with fewer Symptoms of danger than at firft I had reafon to expect.	„
The perlon 1 have mentioned n^ver left my bed-Iide during the remainder' of the night; and I found it v/as to his courage and the Siren gth of his arni that I owed my life. As he approached the centre of the wood, he told me, that he heard a noife, and a voice calling out with Some violence
kill
him.’* Being arrried with piftols, he proceeded forward to refcue the per-fon that was attacked, and tho’ too late to prevent the firft blow, yet he arrived in time to frustrate their liorrid
intentions.
< ii*
/
/»
I
c
41 WREAtH OF FRIENDSHIP.
iritehtions. One of the affallins was wounded and fell; the" other made his
cScape. By the former we were inform-' ed that they had miltehen their obje<d ;' which to me was no Small fatisfadlion;' as I knew not that there was a perSon in the world whom ■ I had fd far injured as that he Ihould wilh to take my life» Plunder did not Seem to be their motive, but the foie objedt of ' their intention was a principle of revenge. A countryman of ovir’sj (I wilh d could add that there were not’many fuch,) had rifen to great-power and riches by the moil' infamous adts of violence and oppref-fionv- A-combination of unhappy natives had agreed to take him off the opportunity. Thefe two were deputed’ for that purpofe; but either from falfe information, or the darknefs of the night, the innocent, for fuch I
will
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
4$
/
will venture to call myfelf, the punifhment of the guilty^
fufFei'cd
V
, however, was only a prelude
V
to an agreeable diScovery. Towards the morning the ft ranger left me, that he might himSelf take a little repoSe.' In the mean time I rofe and drefledy and as he entered tlse room again, at the fame inftant that I exclaimed “ Mandeville!he, with no lefs wonder and Surprize, repeated Scudamore 1” In Ihort, we found in each
other the perfon of a fchool-fellow. I
*
cannot defcribe, the pleafure this dif-covcry produced in us both. My feelings almoft overcame me when I be-held my friend in the perfon of my deliverer. Nor was he lefs fenfibly af-feded, when he found that the man his humanity had Saved, had been the companion of his ygunger years, the
partner
44
WREAXrrOF FRIENDSHIP.
partner of Ills youthful cares and. amufements. After our mutual afto--niShment had fubfided a little, it wast natural that we Should \?ilh to be acquainted with each other’s hiftory,. and particularly with thofe circum-^-fiances which had brought us., together in So d iflant a quarter. of • the globe. It did' not take up much' time
s
to relate the events oLmy life.\ There was nothing remarkable in them, and therefore my narrative Soon gave place to one from which I expected greater
variety.^.
IIie Phijlory of Man deville.
The life of man, ( began my friend) preSents us a checquered feene. Sometimes all is gay, and we proceed rapidly forward without thought and without refiedions. Sometimes
#REATM OP FRIENDSHIP.
45
times a dark cloud over-Ihadows our
proSpeDs, and then we are Sunk into
* ^
teii"fold darkneSs. This may appear a very pompous introdudion to a fimple Story, but believe me I have had the greatest reaSon to extraD wiSdomfrom
O
the various circumStances of my life ; and if 1 have not yet found it, it muft be attributed more to my own inSen-Ability, than the opportunities of in* ftrudtion which have been afforded me.
Sweet are the uSes of adverlity,” fays the poet of nature, therefore I am not without hopes that the time will tome, when I Shall refleO;, even with Some degree of pleaSure, that I have been once rniferable.’^
^When you firll knew me, you may remember that I was the apparent heir of a very handfome fortune ; that my company was courted by many of
4^ WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
-my School-fellows ; and even that our old and worthy mailer regarded me with Some degree of attention, I was not infenlible to theSe circumllances, which is evident from my recalling them at this time to your memory. Then indeed I was happy ; but it was the happinefs of one who knew not that miSery existed in the world. Here our friendlliip, Mr. Scudamore, commenced ; for here 1 remember that we fingled each other out, as a partner at play, or as an affiflant in our talks. About the time that I was to have been admitted at the UniverSity, my father died, and this opened, perhaps the mod diStreSsful feene that human nature can conceive. He left my mother, who had been educated in all the elegancies of life, and fix children, my Self the eldeSt, without a farthing in the world, His fine eftate,
the
WREATH OP FRIENDSHIP. 47
the care and protedlion of a long race •of anceftors, was fold for the payment of his debts; and nothing was referved but a cottage in a diftant county, (the bounty indeed, it was, of a humane creditor) where my mother, with fuch parfimony as fhe was able, might bring up fuch of her children as were yet infants.”
In this cafe, what was my re-Iburce ? I had no money to put me
am
s
not many friends, for all my father’s friends, were fiends only to his /or-tums. One exception indeed I Ihould make, the mlnifer of, the parilh, tho* poor, was hofpitable. He had re-ceived his little living from my father’s hands, and in this hour of my necef-Iky, he forgot not that I was hLs (on. Indeed he was a true chriltian; and

thofe
4^ WREATHOF FRIENDSHIP.
%
thoSe gleams of happineSs which I have fince occafionally met with, I Owe entirely to his instructions. He took the opportunity of my Sorrows to inftill principles of true religion, H® told me upon what motives I mull bear my misfortunes, to whatt end they were given, and whoSe improvement was intended by them. In Ihort, his ieffons were uSeful without being im-pertinent; they were pious without any degree of aufterity.’’
. V
In the parfonage of this good man I continued fome months, without coming to any determination for my future life. At length I wa> ih-i
formed that a noble lord wanted a^ufi*
..1
vate fecietary, a young man of liberal education, and a traclable diSpoSition, My good old friend flattered me with faying that I fhould fill this place
with
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 4,
with credit, and had no doubt but I Should Soon rife to riches and honour. In a diort time I prepared to take poS-
leffion oS my Splendid expedations.
%
My worthy friend parted with me with no Small emotion. He followed me to the door, and bellowed his lall
benedidlion on me.
The tears
trickled down his cheeks; and his lad words were remember that you are a chridian, and hold fad your integrity.” My own tears flowed fo fad that I could hardly take a faiwell look of the good old man, and hds humble dwelling, buried in wcodbine and holly.”

My journey to the metropolis was Soon accomplidied, and I was Soon placed in a manSion where there was more Splendour than happineSs, more confuhon than entertainment.
Vol. II
D
1
50 -WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
0

I entered immediately upon my new empioynient, -and was not Sorry to .find,thatmy Scene,of adtion was an , elegant library, furnifhed vyitli a large colledlion of well decorated books. -‘fHere, Mandeville, Said ,my noble patron, is the place where you will ‘fbe principally employed. Here,;.! ^CSpendall my mornings amidft an-cient,PhiloSophers, and thoSe amia-‘Sble moderns who have dared to combat prejudice by a freedom of thought. Here I will didlate to you my letters of correspondence, and “jnfirudf you .in tfioSe principles ‘‘ . which are the greateft ornaments of 'human reaSon.*^ He would probably have proceeded further, but we were inteiTup)ted; by a tall thin „figure, in a coat buttoned cloSe around him., which had once been black; his face was lengthened, his noSe :hooked, and
his
■WR'EATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Ills eyes Ihafp and penetrating, at the Same time expreffive of a Ibpercilious contempt. In Short, after a few minutes conversation between this Spare Philosopher and my Lord, I diSco--vered that he was one of thoSe illuS-
i
trious moderns, who, with the mod amiable liberty of thought, combated
I
the long eftabliflicd opinions of mankind, and endeavoured, upon the ruins of every virtuous principle, t^ •ered his own Syftem of -infidelity.


‘‘ How fhocked was I to find th^ theSe were my patron’s Sentiments, and that, like otherT*^^ philoSophers,, it was his greatefl: pleaSure to make new converts to his dodrines. At this moment I recolleded the admonitions of my venerable friend, when I left the Ijappy parSonage : and reSolved, be-

fore
52
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
fore I Suffered one Sceptical idea to take root in my mind, to examine the foundation of every thing I had been taught to believe. The Splendid li-brary of the noble .lord afforded few affiftances to this purpofe, Hume, Bo-
lingbroke, with a long train of welL
bouncfEhilofophers, filled the Shelves; i^cxceptithat now and then I met with an old clajjical friend to relieve me from absolute defpair. As my time, however, was not altogether occupied by my attendance on , his Lordfhip, I found Sufficient opportunity to purfue my fludies. The. evening of every day his Lordfhip Spent from home. Lfhould have informed you that our houfehold did not confifl of many per-fons, behdes the Servants. His wife had been dead Several years, and left him no heirs to his poffeffions, except A very amiable as well as beautiful
daughter.
WREATH* OF FRIENDSHIP. 53
/
daughter, at this time entering her nineteenth year. The houSehoId was dire(51:ed by a maiden lifter of his lord-Ihip, as reSpedtable for her diSpolitiorv as Ihe was for her rank and years. My Lord, however, tho’ a good Philosopher, was neither a good father nor a good brother I and, as you will find in the Sequel, by no means, a good mailer.


‘‘A fit of the gout confined him to his houfe, and as the malady was in his hand, it deprived him of the uSe of his pen. He was. therefore obliged to employ me in a correspondence, which informed me that his evening
lucubrations were not of the moll vir-
*
tuous nature. Thisfirft attempt I Submitted to with a fort of Smothered indignation ; but when he requested me to conduct his lady privately to his
u 3
houfe
54
WREATH OF FRI £ NDSHI
houSe, I revolted at the propoiitioii,, and happening at that momentuo call a flight refledion: on his philofophical:. principles, his-anger roSe to the moft; uncontronled pitch, and I Soon Sound liiat I had ioSt his. patronage and protediohC’''
‘d Iliould now have been contented*' to depart, but for a thought ( and it, liad never been more than a thought )■ that 1 Ihouid leave behind the amiable and accomplillied Lady Catharine. 1 had not preSumed to look So high; for an objed of my afFedions. I durft not indulge the moft diftant refledion on the fubjed-; and I believe I would iboner have died than have- declared the caufe of my diftrefs. I was not, however, ignorant, that I had fome fmall intereft in the breaft of this young lady.There are a thoufand ways
,	of
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
55
of deceiving one’s own heart. We
had often read elegant authors toge? iher, and our ways of thinking feemed, Vvithout our being SenSiblc of it, always to coincide. 1 frequently read amuS-ing books to the old lady in an evening, and would Sometimes have found my attention riveted by the refined ob-fervations of her niece, Thefe were pleasures, Mr. Scudamore, difficult to be parted with ,* yet thefe I had re-folved to leave. Tho’ my patron had exacfted a cruel Service, I could not repay his former kindneffies with ingratitude. I was poor indeed, but I reSolved to be honeft,”
^c^fter one of our uSual evening parties,! accidentally dropped a hint ofmy intention to quit my prefent fituation, and I believe, I might add, that I fliould leave all happineSs behind m(5.
D 4
Imagine
A
7
¥
1-i
li
1! .1
I
ij
i •
!;

ril\
(It
i-i
I!
!!
it
ill
'H
\
dll
;Pi
III
yO
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Imagine my Surprize, when my ami-
able young lady changed colour, and
fainted inflantly in my arms. The
old lady and mySelf were, greatly
alarmed by this Sudden indiSpoIidon.
She was, however. Soon recovered
Some remote cauSe was fought for as
an excuSe for her illneSs ; and we re-
tired to our Several apartments. What
was my agitation on returning to my
chamber! The difcovery was won-
derful ; and I threw mySelf on the bed
in an agony of perplexity. I reSolved
at once to leave the houSe; but then

to leave the object of my tendereit
:7affion ! Various were the tumults of
my Soul, After three hours of theur-
moft anxiety I became more calm.
and at length determi. .ed to abide by
my firft reSolution. My Small portion
of moveables I colledted together, and
then, as my laft Sacrifice, ( the only
ftep

IV'REATH OF FRIENDSHIP. S’"}
Step upon cool refledlion I have repented of ) diScloSed my whole Soul to her
V'
whom I had not dared to think of but
»-
with the moll diftant admiration. This I did for the fake of explaining my Sudden diS-appearance; but at tbue fame time allured her, that in all probability this was the laft time die would
ever hear of me.”
About day-break in the morning I left my chamber ; it was not uncommon for me to take an early walk, and therefore my intention was not fufpeded by the Servants. The month was May, and my Steps were involuntarily led towards the fields. • I wandered from one village to another, , torpid, as it were with grief, not knowing, or at lead, not caring where I went. Fatigue at length got the better of my Sorrow ; I Sunk upon the
u 5
croimd
■ V
5«
WEEATFr- OF FRIENDSHIP
ground at the entrance of a wood, aild' remained, as I imagine, for fome time ima ftate of infenSibility, On coming ^ myfelf.I found a wood-man ftand-mg by me; he had a bill in his hand,
'-V	^ V
and a bundle of faggots on his Shoulder ; he was returning home after his:
Ik*
daily labour. Compaffion had feized the poor creature, and he was aftuatly weeping over my feeming torments. I immediately hailed this token of hu-
and as I greatly wanted a
lodging for. the, night, queftioned
A- ^
him about the place of his abode. His
/
good-nature was equal to his compaf-Sion; I accompanied him to his cot-tage, and accepted a portion of the fc^nty meal,the wife had prepared for her hufband. I' retired to an upper chamber, but not to reft ! Here I had" time for reflexion. A few hours had' removed me .from a palace, to a very
htimbk;
r
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
59
humble cottage; from an affluent, tho* dependent Situation, to all the appearance of poverty, and all the expedta-tion of diftreSs. Yet with all this I had
not let
p my integrity. This thought
/
by degrees quieted'the perturbations of my mind; and hope "Seemed to' Smile upon me.- the rifino; fun be-'
X	O
gan to tinge the tops ,of’the highefb oaks, dumber feemed willing to me. This refredied my body, and' the train ofrededtions that I had'fallen' into before I dept, cauSed me to awake ' in the molt agreeable* tranquillity.; . I ; continued in this
week, undetermined ' wlidt ' paths I diouId pLirSue.- In the day time I wandered thro’ the woods, attending to the Songs of the feathered tribe, oc-■ cafionally interrupted- by the ftrokes of the woodmanaxe; in the evenins;s X watched the ridng of the moon and,
retired
cottage' above a

A,
• \ t'
I
M
li'
h
u
11
II
n
,‘l!
'. • lilt
i* i.
i
1
li
ii
M;
Ii.
1
lit
!i
I
! r
1)
1 : j

i
6o
WRE ATH OF FR I'EN D3H I P
o..
retired well contented to my coarSe,
hut hoSpitable entertainment.”
At length, however, I refolved to
leave my retirement. My hold and
hofteSs were Sorry to part with their
vifitor, and I yet • polieffed more
tlian Sufficient to ■ purchaSe their
gratitude, if more noble motives
had failed.
My lirSt lodging irt
town was near the Royal Exchange ;
as I carefully Shunned tlioSe places
where it was poffible I might have
been known. Every day I vifite4:
this great reSort of the m-e'chants of alt
% /
nations. I remarked the countenances.
and made refleDions on the outward..
appearances of thoSe I Saw there. This
was only. amuSement/ The greater
%
part were too much engaged to regard
me, as I had neither a thip to put in
commiffion, or a bargain that was
worth attending to.

A
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP^
r
6 r
‘‘A Stranger in the midft of thouSands, r knew not what courSe to piirSue. My education prevented me from appl)dng mySelf to menial Services; and none were ready to employ a perfon in a; more reputable ftation, who could not give a better account of himSeif. I will not trouble you with the many mortifications I received, nor the diftrels ta which I was driven. My money was
N
exhaufted^ and I had no friends; once i was in priSon, but delivered, as my debt was very Small, by the humanity of a ftranger. My laft employment in England was as a writer to the book- .
o
fellers. For thispurpoSe I changed my lodgings to Pater-nofter-Row. Sometimes I wrote political pamphlets, and
N
Sometimes Sermons; Sometimes I translated from the French, and Sometimes compiled from the dallies. As my employmencwas innocent, (for I never
prof-
I !
' : I
1
! ■

f i
r!
1
i,
11
■ i
: f
IV
o

€
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
profliituted my pen to unworthy pur-pcfes ) I was. contented.’'’
One day pading thro’ the India-houSe I met a gentleman whom I re*
%
membered w^ell at my father’s table ; he did not See me but palled along. I'he porter of the houSe informed me he was a clire6lor. As my road fome-times lay this way 1 met him again, and caught his eye. After a civil falu-tation from him, he alked me feverai Cjueflions about my family, and parti« cularly about my prefent lituation. My ftory I told him was long, and that mv htaaiidn was far from comfortable.' He t ook no notice, but deli red me at the diftance of a week to call at his houSe . and believe me, Scudamore, this generous friend, without any foli-
citadon, prefented me at my firft, en-
tranc


WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
^3
trance into his apartment, with a very lucrative appointment in India. Need I add more ! you See me hei e ; and providence has been So kind as to permit me to Save your life/*'
Since I arrived here every thing -
prospered with me; my fortune is ?ven larger than mv willies. I
HOW
have remitted enough to place my mother in an eligible lituation ; and edu-eate the reft of my family. This is the true life of riches! As for Lady Catharine, often: do I ligh when 1 remember her, and many a tear do I drop upon her picture. But come, Scudamore, I long to be introduced to your wife. You are now, I hope, able to travel; and we ftiould not prolong any unea-fineSs that your abSence may have ©ccafioned.’’

*■
6a wreath of friendship.
Thus Mandevilie concluded his narrative with an irreSifhble grace, He Seems to be a credit to the fortune he has acauired; and wants nothing
Jl	O
but- his amiable Lady Catharine to make, him Completely happy.
I
Your’s, &c.
IJonel Scudamore>
LETTER

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 6^
L E T T E R XXXVI.
Lord Vrijihury, to the Rev. Edward
t
4
Seymour,
Wejibury-Lodge, June'Xli
UR hopes of Mr. Drummond
recovery have been So flu6luating for Some days paft, that I deferred writing to you, my dear Sir, ’till I could at leaSt give you a deciSve account; a bad one you were prepared for, and I was certain you would readi-* ly bear a little anxiety to have it diS-fipated by good news at laft. I have now the pleaSure to inform you, that we have every reaSon to expeft a happy termination to our diftreSs. The furgeons have at length been fo fuc-
eeSsful as to extract the ball,.and they
\ -
now
1
IV
t.
H
r ♦
\ t
I
66
WRi'A'TH OF FRIENDSIMP.-

now tell us that time will reStore' our friend, who tho’ as weak as poffi-ble is Senlible and without fever; and chat there is no doubt but that a continuance of QuietneSs and attention xvilh
1 ^
not only reinftate him in health, but. tranquillity. This Subje£t occupies both my pen and thoughts, and leaves me no time to thank you as ! ought for your very obliging and friendly letter; but your candour willl am Sure, excuSe at this time any negleff, but that of our dear Henry, who hasjuftfent to delire, to -fee me«
your obedient fervant,
LETTER.
■T-
.<. -. * •
• 1
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
6r
' L E. T T E R XXXVII.
/
Lady Julia Harcourtf to Mifs Darnlby*
Lwingjion-Abbey, June 23,
HAT real pleaSure it is, to have a friend, like my Eliza, to whom, r can with equal confidence unboSom my grief, and impart my joy. Drummond is recovering ! I wifii i could make you fenSible of the exqui-fite Satisfaflion thoSe three words have the power of conveying to the bread: of your Julia. He will live and be happy, and 1 Shall not have the con tinual pain of rellecling, that it was perhaps my levity and indiScretion^^ that brought one of the moil amiable of his Sex to^ an untimely grave! that
plunged
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
plunged his parents into the deepeft miSery ; or baniihed for ever from liis country a perSon, whom my father had received into his houSe under the title of friend. Thank Heaven! I am' now relieved from theSe dreadful ideas; and I hope I Shall be ever grateful for fo great a bleffing. Ever fince my father returned from Lord Mording-ton’s laft night, and informed us that Drummond was now thought entirely out of danger, I have felt fo happy, fo tranquil, and contented, that it appears as if I had Ihaken off every thing that was mortal about me, and was quite transformed, into an aerial being.
But I am afraid this agr.eable enchantment will not long continue, for I have juft now received a vifit from Lord Weftbury, which will, in the end, I doubt, be produfHve of Some
uneaSineSs:
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
69
unealineSs; and will, after all, convince me that I am Still an inhabitant of this nether world. My mother and Selina, according to my mother’s uSual cuftom, went this morning a round of vilits amongft the cottagers; my father was following his ufual occupations of planting and improving his eftate; «ind poor I remained alone in my dreS-ling room; that room which for So many weeks paft has been the continual-Scene of mirth and feftivitv. The ftillneSs of every objedt around me, joined to the recolledlion of the changes that had happened in fo Ihort a time in our little Society, naturally threw me into a train of refledtion, which would
I believe have continued for Some
>
itime^ ’had not my reverie been inter--rupted by the entrance of Lord Weft-■bury. After the ufual compliments were palfed, and he had given me a
fatisfadlory

‘7 O	VV R E A T H OF FRIE N D S HIP,
I
1
iatisSaclory account of the health of hh
coufin, he took a feat by me. He
can never be ungraceful, and yet I
thought I perceived fomething embar-

raffed in his manner which I had
-never before obferved. “ I am come-,
Lady Julia, Said he, after a Short pauSe,
upon one of the moll ,unpleafant em
baffies I was ever before engaged in;
I am requefled by my father to wait
upon you, and beg your acceptance of
my hand and fortune."^ I rofe -from my
r
feat with great deliberation, and ma-
11
king one of my very bell curtlies, “ I
(
•return you a great many thanks, my
‘ I
Lord, dor your civility; and So one of
the moil unpleafant embaffies you were
ever engaged in, is to beg my accep
tance of your hand and fortune; very
gallant indeed!” He Smiled and took
my hand, I have at lead: one fatiS-
I i
Ladion, Lady Julia, in finding you
!
! I
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
7'I
ftili retain your vivacity; fi'om tho paleneSs and dejedti-on oSyour looks at my lirft entrance, I was apprehenfive your charming Spirits iiad quite for-iaken you.” I was vexed at theinSm-

f
ation; don’t-be alarmed, my Lord, Said-I, on that account, I flatter my-Self I have dill Spirits'.enough :left t© make a figure as your .wife; quite as much as you will think agreable, or I <am much miftakenI will not lie mnder the imputation of having faid •an uncivil;-thing to you, my amiable ■'friend, Said he,;I think any man might efteem himSelf particularly fortunate, • who could be So happy as to engage the affections of Lady Julia Harcourt^ ■who had a heart ta offer in return j I believe you are not ignorant of my unalterable attachment to your friend, MiSs Courtney ; rny love for her is fo interwoven with my exiftence, that I
firmly
4-
.72
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
‘ ! firmly believe it can end but with my
iiSe; with Such feelings^ how can I
with any tolerable compoSure, even
to oblige a parent, offer my hand to
any other woman.”
“ Now, my Lord, I can with lin-cerity thank you for your ingenu-iOuSneSs,: I did indeed know vour at-
y o'	'	J
tachment to Selina before, but it gives me an additional pleafure to find that
you really efleem me worthy the title
%
of your frierld, by allowing me a place
in your confidence. Let us now con-
fult what is bed to be done' in this af-
&ir, for our mutual happinefs. Shall
I'openly decline the offer of your hand?
♦
or what other method can
we
fix
upon that is mod likely to appeafe Lord Mordington.” My charming, my amiable Julia, exclaimed he, ihow fhall 1 exp refs my admiration of
your
WReATH FklENDSrilf*. 7J
ybur condud j you are willing to draw
t
down the diSplealure of all parties up-
on yourSelf, to promote the hap^iineSs'
, )
5f 5’our friends. But I am afraid, after all, nothing that we can do will be of
-	i
any Service to appcafe, aS you fay, my
I
father; he is vidlent in his difike Selina, I know not for what reafon. I have coniidCred and rr-confidered the fuhjecl:, and could think of no other method to make him alter his opinionj, but by a private marriage; that, your friend has from a motive of delicacy; absolutely refuSed, anel yet I am not withoutiiope, that time and impoitu« nity may tempt her to become more fivourable to my willies. I am confident, would file give me leave to in-
troduce her to LordMordington, as his daughter, he would in a Snort time be as proud of her under that title.
Vok IL
E


; <6.- ■-■ C""

,74
WREATH OF P R I E KBSH 1 P
as he is now Solicitious She Ihould
never become So.
})
Before I had time to. reply, my
father entered the room; he feemed
So mightily pleafed with the party he
^ met with, that I was qmte convinced
this had been a preconcerted Scheme
between the two old gentlemen the
night before. Lord Weftbury fat a
fhort time, and then took his leave,
firmly believing I am perSuaded that I
would intreat Selina to run away with
him. I cannot fay I concur with him
in opinion of that being the moll like-
%
ly way to reconcile Lord Mordington.
¥
But love has the povver of blinding the
moil Senfible of his votaries. In any
ether cafe I dont think thoSe would be
• * * ’
the Sentiments of Lord Weftbury. I
have not tim.e to add more, than with
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Low much Iincerity I am, my dear Eliza’s ever alfedionate^
Julia Harcourt*
. y
LETTER XXXVIII.
Mrs. Scudamore, to MiSs Darnlej.
MadraSy April I Oi
N the courSe of three weeks, my deareft Eliza, we Shall leave India ; in three or four months (long tedious .months they will Seem to me) I trull 1 Shall once more revilit En gland, and the Beloved friends it contains. Safe arrived there with my huSband, that Spot will be the centre of all my deSires; and the plcafure I anticipate on that
E 2
occahon
il
76
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
"occafion adds to my impatience to ■undertake the voyage, which I now do with eagerneSs and without fear; and ;my Spirits are f® good, that I flatter mySelf I fhall not experience that un-‘.eaSineSs uSual in a long voyage.
Every thing now looks with So Smiling a Sace, that I Sorget all my diftreSs; for diftreSsj Eliza, I have lately ex-perienced in a Severe degree. Lionel lias been ill, dangeroufly ill, in a violent Sever, occafioned by a blow he received ; and I had every reaSon to •dread, that widowed and forlorn I mould have to return to a country which without his preSence would have loft all its charms. But I thank heaven, his health is reftored, and he is now buSy in preparing for our departure, with alacrity and pleaSure, not inferior ‘ to what I feel. I .am perfedly fenSiblc
that
r!
/
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
77
that living here in the Style we have done has been as diSagreeable to him as to me: and that the deli re of ac-qniring a fortune fuffi’eient to place me in affluence, has been the foie realbn of facrificing fo many of his beft|years. Ah, little did he know how Soon my wiihes were gratified, and that a Small, a very Small fortune, was adc~ quate to every convenience and every luxury I could require; but as this time is almoft elapfed I will not now lament it. However we had paffed -
V
it, it would now have been over; and . the recolleflion of it alone would have remained. We are now furnilhed 'With the means of benevolence and-
t
the power of being ufeful to our fellow creatures; may we prove juft Stewards of the talent committed to our care, and may we not follow the example of'
E 3
thofe
7

wreakThof friendship.
thoSe Selhlli mortals who live for them Selves alone 1
It Surely is not the bufineSs ofaratio-nal being, or anSvvering the end of our creation, to be continually wandering about in Search of amufe-ment; the poor and the miSerable have a claim upon us for much, perhaps even alhhAi we Spend in folly anddif-fipation; but I believe it is poflible to comply moderately with the cufloms of that world in which we live, without being hurried away by the torrent. Mr. Scudamore and mySelf have laid down a plan in theory we mean Soon to put in pradlice, you can inform us whether it is chimerical or no ? but the xdeais plealing; and therefore we do not relinqililh it till we have given it a fair trial. We mean to purchaSe an eftate at a conliderable diltance from the
metropolis.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
79
metropolis, and where its baneful iiiflu-

be filmd:
our tenants and dependants we will ftrive to be the means of good to all. Not by a miftaken liberality or indulgence, but by inftrucling them in agriculture, oeconomy, and the way, nor to wealth, but to independence; which is only to be gained by induftry and purity of manners. You will tell us that we have ourSelves Some of thole arts yet to learn! very true, but can we Spend our time better than in ftudy-ing thoSe Sciences which will be uSefal to us alSo, and which contain even in the moll trivial SenSe a “ fund of entertainment!’^ By Setting them an example of religion and virtue, we hope to prove to them and their children, its utility; and by So doing, lay a foundation which the accidental influ-
E 4.
ence
8o
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
encc oS vice may not be able to overturn. TheSe are our day-dreams when Separate, and our conversation when
Neither Mr. Scudamore
too;etlier.
' O
nor mySelS are fond of living in the great world; and we hope to find kour^ thus employed never bang heavy «n our hands.
nn
t

1
IS
I
With minds thus occupied are ,ypnr old friends, my Eliza, returning to you, not leSs worthy I hope of your affeCtion than they were Some years ae;o ; and confident that your heart
4
will have undergone nq change, imleSs indeed you have given it by this time ta another gueft. At the time of
your writing your lafl letter, which I re-
ceived a few weeks ago, no Such event had taken place; but when I conSider how long it is fince that letter was written, I perceive how many changes
may
"VVREATHOF FRIENDSHIP.
8 I
\
may have happened' ere now.' In the midH of my rejoicings on my return, I cannot help dropping a tear to the memory of our excellent friend and in-ftruCtor, Dr. Morton, and for the • diftreSs his widow muft feel for his lofs, which to her it muft always be r but to you I hope it is not irreparable, thb’< iiiuch to be lamented.' My hulbandu bids me tell; you that as‘you would" not return him one line to his gallant , epiftle, he will be equally proud; nor w-ould he fend you the following meS-Sage but out of pure ; charity, viz. ^fto *
recommend to you to put yourSelf and >
✓
fortune into the hands of Some amiable man, who being nearly your own age^ . will in all probability continue to you '> his counSelj his attentions, and Support in all dangers, ghoJUy and bodily, as \'ou may want them; that zve can contra-did your arguments againft matrimo- -
£5
ny
i !
; \ f
■ »
$2 WREATH QF FRIENDSHIP.
ny any time you pleaSe; and convince you (of what perhaps you are already convinced) that it is, a ftate capable
Hear
of the moft refined felicity.’’ this, thou dear Infidel, and tremble for-having continued fo long fingki
hfliould be ungrateful to my newly-found treaSure Orixana, could I cloSe-this letter without fpeaking of one to whom I owe fo much gratitude. The prefent Mrs. DenniSon made me of this excellent woman has been a real blefling; her attachment to me L dare fay knows no bounds; and during Mr. Scudumore’s illnefs, fhe was to both all we could expert from theoldeft friend-or neareft relation. She aflifled in nurfing* hlht, fhe comforted and conSoled All her own-af-
k
fti<5tions, Severe as they have been, were banifhed; ^ and humanity took
entir«
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP

entire poITeffion of that breaft which might be SuppoSed to have grown callous to every feeling. It is but lately that I have known her tale of forrows, and I have not time now to commit it to paper for your peruSal; but on fliipboard, if 1 am able, I will try to recolleCl the moll ftriking - parts of her fimple narrative.' It will loSe much in .not beingi told>by herSelf, whoSe pathetic manner makes itfo ih-terehing. I have made her happy ’by convincing her we will never parr, and that She Iliall be the companion of my fortunes; all her prayers have been offered on this account, and I be-
V
lieve file will think every hour a day till we arrive in En2;land : where Hie

expeds to meet upon the fliore, a lohg loll hufband. Poor Orixana ! I will not damp the expedation which this voyage has made So dciirable, but
1




1
|4 WREATH or ERIENDSHIP
I fear diSippoiiitment will be the end of thy hopes. Adieu, Eliza! reSl aS-fured that nothing can be a greater happinefs to .me, than to fee you.
Scud.vmoT.&.
L LT T E R X}
Lord Wejlhury, to the Rev. £. Seymour..
JVeJihur^Lodgey yanedlif.
The health of our friend, my
dear, Mr. Seymour, becomes every day more and more favourable.. He will fopn be able to ufe his pen, and I don’t doubt but you will receive its firft offering. He now get-s- up
9
.every day, but is yet too weak to Ihare,-any thing with hi.s friejads but joy \ and'.
•	^	*.	•	V.	»	.
I.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
^5
I have none of that to diSpoSe of. A few weeks ago I thought nothing could ctffedi; me more SenSibly than the date in which I Saw poor Drummond ; I now find there is one perSon in the world who occupies a larger portion of my heart than even that valued relation ; and the idea of being feparated from her, cauSes a pang ftill more
poignant
You will excufe me for
troubling you with my concerns, but the heart ready to burfl: with its own anguilh Seeks for fome one to unbur-d'len itSelf to; and our late correspondence upon a melancholy fubjeCl, has convinced me, that you have humanity enough to pity the dillrefs of a friend, to give him your confidence,
A
and to afiift him with your advice, I will therefore haflen to give you a detail of the tranfadlions that have
been
%
(!

r

I

86
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
been going forward during my attendance-on Mr. Drummond.
\
My father, eager no doubt, to en-fure my happineSs, and unconScious Oi infringing any right, propoSed to my Lord St. Clair a union between I.ady Julia and mySelf, without
giving me the lead hint of his inten*
\
tions. Could I have offered her a heart, free and diSengaged, and have received fuch a one in return, it might have been to both a connexion not only of convenience but felicity; but fituated as we are, nothing could be So unfortunate as this propofal; and' my-objedions to the alliance have in-cenfed my father fo highly, that I fear all my art, without the fubmillion he^ requires, will be infufficient to redn,-ftate me in his good graces. ‘With -a foul not very fufceptible of the tender
paffion.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
paffion, he cannot conceive what diS-like we can have to a marriage which appears to him to be So neceffary to the improvement of both our foitunes;-(which indeed are Separately large enough to Satisfy reafonable deSires, ’ and even now to contribute to the wants of others ) but two* people are to be made miSerable for the fake of joiiv-ing acre to acre, and the lengthening! a grove to the extent of ten miles^^ when five are enough for every convenience the moft wanton fancy can defire.
This would have been my opinion if my heart were free; but attached as * it is to MiSs Courtney, I look ,on wealth; only as a Secondary^ confideration; jior fhould I have had a wifh for it but as a
t
means of placing her in a fituatiom
f
11
; I
t ^
I I
/


1
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
where her merit and virtues might be

moft confpicuous.
I have endeavoured to convince my
miftaken parent that her worth, her
education, and understanding, would adorn the highell rank, and give luftre
to it; but he is indexible, and infills
as a proof of my affeOion for him, that
I See her no more, that I forget her,
.nor think of, nor Speak to her again.
I have not, nor neither can I promiSe
Such a Sacrifice, becaufe I am certain
it is what I never Shall be able to per-
form 1 I even fear your fuperior reaSon
and unbiaSed judgment will condemn'.
me, when I tell you, I have dared to

mention to Selina, as.our only re
T’
iource, a private marriage;
but file
forever Soars above me, and vows
tie ^er to be mine without , my father’s
conient


WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. §9
‘‘ I have never, Slie Says, known the bleSSing of a parent, but I have been taught to reverence the very name, and to look on diSobedience as a mortal crime ; let me not then be guilty of leading one .1 love, into danger, or calling down on your head the curSe of him who has a. right to expert obedience, tho^ not to force it. We are both young, my Lord, and according to the courSe of nature may look forward to many years; let us not embitter theSe by follies of which we are fure to repent; nor cloud over future profpefts with family difeontents which would .deftroy all our enjoyments. Lord Mordington is growing into years, let me not deprive him of the conSclation he has a right to expert from you. I have vowed never to be yourh but on terms of general ConSentpif it will, coati ibute to ) our eaSe
and

!
w
; 5
ii
»I : I
Ui<
i III :
II 1
: I
i! '
»i 1
1
90
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
and happineSs, I will vow alSo, never to be anoiher^s, whikl you continue fingle and attached to me.”
This, my dear Sir, is Selina’s fixed reSolve. ReaSon I know mull: approve of it, but love would have rejoiced at a leSs rigid decifion. Sometimes I am inclined to doubt of the flrength of her affedion for me, but I know the offers She has refufeds Since our acquaintance, and that fhe is all truth and Sincerity, and in a moment I ba-nifli every thing but confidence in her conftancy. That mine will be equally firm, equally permanent, I will never ceaSe to affure her, but we muff Separate; this is my ambitious father’s decree, and in which for a time I rnun: acquieSce. I fear, however, I I cannot be quite So Submiffive as he expeds me, for he imagines I may
live
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
91
live within three miles of the woman I love above every earthly being, and never See her, or think of her; indeed, my good Sir, I have not reSolution Sufficient to aid me in an adtion So heroic. I feel myfelf but a weak mortal, contending with So violent an adversary as love; and I am much more inclined to yield than make any refift-ance. Were the objedf lefs worthy, I might perhaps endeavour to conquer this inclination; as it is I will fly, but carry along with me the arrow and the wound, and cherifli a fenti-ment that I am convinced is honour* ■ able, for it is the love of virtue. herSelte You will fay that the fubjedl hurries me too far, and that I forget having at the beginning of my letter alked your advice; whereas, I Seem to be giving my own opinion, and abiding by it, like moil people in an error. But tho'
you
< i
:
i i
i ]
!i
I 5
iM
I ••
i i
1 h-
»I
li;
L;
li i
li
i 1
!i

II
I r i
til
!
H!

li
n
02
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
you See I am determined to my
general behaviour, I wiSh for your ad-
vice how to conduO: mySelf properly
in this perplexing atSair.
I beoin to
o
diftruft my own judgment on an oc-
cafion where the paffions take the
lead.
You will favour me with a conti-
nuance of your correfpondence I am
fure, but if you could for a few days
give us the pleaSure of your fociety, it
would be contributing to the happinefs
of an old as well as a new friend ; one
who is eager to prove how much he
has and does value your friendship; and
the latter how much he will if you ho-
nour him with it. I remain vour moll
obliged and very affedionate.
hVeJlhury^
LETTER
Hi
it
ti;
WREATH OF FRIEHDSHIP.
93
LETTER XL.
■Lath Julia Harcourt, to Mifs Darnlej.
\
V
Livingjion’Abbeyy yane a6.
Have often heard it remarked, my dear Eliza, “ that a ftriking contrail in Scene or Sitiiatioa, could never be iinpleafant, now 1 do aver the di-
i
redt contrary, from ray own experi-
ence this very evening. Fhe Sereni-
\,
ty of the weather induced Selina and mySelf to exceed our uSual limits in •our walk, and ramble to a water mill about two miles dillant. It Hands at the foot of a hill, or, I ?Ihould rather fay, the hill is of a Semi* circular form. So as to Screen the miller’s pleaSant cottage from every cold
i i

I	j
I	:
I i
I'
; I :
i! I
I! [
■ i * >,

i I
t ■	{
J * i
h !
[ \
i
f
»
j
li
! J.
li
94
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP*
and penetrating wind. The river forces its way rudely over Several broken rocks and large Hones,and Solicits your attention as well from its pidiureSque beauties, as from its agreeable murrhurs.On the oppofite bank is a large hanging wood, that throws a Soft and pleafant Shade over the whole of this delightful valley.The miller’s wife was Seated upon a ruftic bench at the door of her cottage; her Son, a handSome youth,-that might have pafTed for a fliepherd in a romance, was reclined upon the bank at a little diltance, drawing Some delight-ful ftrains from a clarinet; whilft his brother, a Sweet child about two years old, ^was gathering flowers beSide
V
him.
There was Something in this Scene lb fimple and pleafing, that we likewise feated ourfelves upon the verdant
mead,
;ll
I!': i

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 9^^
rhead, to contemplate the beauties of the place. Our meditations, how-ev^er, were Soon interrupted by Sounds, which to my companion I firmly believe were more Sweet than ihe warbling, fongflers in the neighbouring
grove, or the Soft notes from the youth’s clarinet, it was the voice of Lord Weflbury. For Some time we
topics, the
converSed
on general
beauties of nature, See. but in a Scene So formed to inSpire love, with the objeef of your tendereft attachment by your fide, it would have been unnatural, nay impoffible, not to have in. troduced the favourite Subject. How much I wifh. Lady Julia, SaidWeft-bury, that our Society, at this moment, could be increaSed by the pre-fence of the man, who of all others .has the power of conferring ha'ppiueSs
on
i »


i
: ? ill
i;
i
95 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Oil you.” An involuntary tear Ilarted in my eye ; I was afliamed oS my weak-neSs, and dreaded nothing So much
.	f
as Weftbury’s obSerVing it. 1 told him I thought it was a very pretty hint for me to retire, and' rati hastily down the bank, to the milieds wife. She took me into the cottao;e,
O
and gave me the hiftory of every indi-
vidual of her little family.
Every
thing was So neat and comfortable^ that I protest, Eliza, I thought that I could with pleaSure have renounced all the trappings of grandeur; and with a few choSen friends, coSild have con-'tentedly finiflied my peacefvil days in that recluSe lituation. We ftayed ’till the evening; Shades began to cloSe
o	o
around us; 1 then Thought it high Time to remind the worthy, pair, that •they were not in fairy land, but muft again return to the common path of
'mortals*
A

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP* 07
mortals. We Sauntered home in that happy frame of mind, which I am convinced, my friend, you have muck oftener experienced than I have. How ardently I wilh I could attain that firm ' oquality of foul which you enjoy, and which muft be fuch a real blelhng to the poflelTor,
When we arrived at the avenue. Lord VVeftbury told us, that his father’s early fupper, and a point lie made of never keeping him waiting, -muft be his apology for not feeing us quite home. The motive of obliprinp'
A	O O
a parent was too amiable not to approve of it; we therefore went quietly home without him.. But how much were we furpriSed on entering the drawing-room, to find Lord Mor-dington there,.
Vol. II.	F

.
N
1 !

; ‘
I f
ii
I ;
f •
N
I r
f
? i
i r }
i !
f I
r
I ? » ; i •
I
} '
98 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
iKow Shall I give you a description of the party ? my mother looked extremely uneaSy, and every time they ' fpoke Seemed to-add to her anxiety; my father appeared , to be much more angry than he is accuftomed to be; as for Lord Mordington, paffion, pride, petulance, malice, and ill-nature, were all blended in ^ his countenance. As Soon as he beheld me, There Ihc is,’’ Said he, ^^let her an, fwer for herfelf. Tell me, young lady, have you, durft you fay, that you would not marry my fon ? and yet if it is fo, don’t tell me ; I could not with patience fee the woman, who was fo loft to every thing that was good, as to fay 111e did not cboofe to marry Lord Weftbury. But I know your motives, your reafons are plain enough; don’t think I want penetration fo much as not to know it is
your


I
WREATl! OF FRIENDSHIP.
99
your love for Harry Drummond.’* Her love for Harry Drummond*” Said my father, interrupting him, if I had the leaf! fufpicion that She dared
but for an inftant
»> ((
Who
your fufpicions, my Lord St. Clair^ you are So paffionate, fo impetuous, if you would be calm and collected, as I am, you would fee things in their true light. But don’t alarm yourfelf, Drummond will never have her ; pooP fellow, he has engaged himfelf, like a graceleSs dog as he is, to marry French girl; and as Soon as he gets better, he is going to See her. It diS-trelTes his parents much, but who is there that ever had a child that did not diftreSs them ?” This lad; Speech of Lord Mordington’s was more than my father’s temper could bear; that his daughter Ihould be in love with a man who had evidently left her for
F2
another
iih!
!i ''
lib
iii
hi
m
M
If
•; I
J i

: <
• ’ 1
i
; 1
!'i
iji
I
i!
I {
0
iii
:l'
< i
loo WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
another woman, and this attachment Should prevent her accepting the man he had deftined for her, was too much. I confeSs I was notleSs offended
c
than my father. My bofom glowed with an honeft indignation at the thought; and ftupified as I was with the reception I had met with at my entrance, i yet found words to exculpate myfelf from the charge.
There is but one way, Julia, to convince me,” faid my father, and that is ihftantly to tell Lord Mor-dington, you will with pleafure accept the addrelfes of his Son.”
' This was a hard condition! I he-litated, If you don’t comply,” con-
f
tinned my father, I will diSown you for my child; nor will I Suffer any one to plead in your behalf.” He came up to me with a firmnefs in his look that
V absolutely
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 101
absolutely frightened me; I biirft into tears! this had more effed than all
the oratory I could have uSed. “ She is my only child,” Said he, ‘Ct has been the Iludy of her life, hitherto, to make me happy. She is the comfort of my age; and fliall I, to gratify my-felf, make her life miSerable ? I cannot do it, my Lord Mordington; you" muft tell your fon, without Julia will
r
marry him with her own free will, he fliall not have her at all.” ‘^You are a fooliili man, my Lord St, Clair, to be Softened by a woman’s tears; they will do her no harm: But let her cry, file is ftubborn enough, I fielieve, my my fon is better without her; but one tiling more I inlift upon, he fliall not have 7our other daughter as you call her; flie is certainly an improper match for him.” No refledions upon my Selina, my Lord,” Said my
F3
father
;
102 WREATH OF FRIENDSHI?.

father, Ihe is a good girl, and I dare^ anSwer, has no thoughts of your Son So much the better, So much the better,’^ Said his lordlliip, for fhe
never (hall have him.'’ Poor Selina's,
#
caSe was not now much better than mine; fhe bluflied extremely when my father aflerted flie had no thoughts of Lord Weflbury ; but we were ail relieved by Lord Mordington’s taking his leave. You will believp, Eliza, I was truly grateful to my father for his goodneSs to me. When we retired, 1 found myfeif fo little inclined to fleep, that I fat down to impart this whole Scene to you; I know you will feel for our perplexities. Adieu, my dear friend, no fituition can ever alter the warm affe(5lion that is felt for you, by your
yalia Harcourt.
LETTER
. 1
WREATH OP FRIENDSHIP. To^
L E T TER
XLI.
Rev. Edward. Seymouri to Henry
D rummondy Efq.
fFansfordy Lune 27.
My Dear Friend,
S I am now relieved by your recovery, from the anxiety which attended your late lituation, 1 feel an impulSe to alfume a moie Serious air; and admonilh you, both in the character of a friend and a divine. Believe me, that this late tranSadion, which So deeply hurt my feelings as your friend, wounded me much more
acutely as a man of religion, I can-
#
not look upon the decihon of theSa points of honor, as they are called, in any other light than that of a cool
F4
deliberate

\.
}
I »
hi
. i
bl!
:.ii} ;
ni •
il4. t
'ill
h!i:
ifr'
' !i; illii:
. I*
iiij
* ii
iiih
diii;
:!!i
n
iL
i lb
i i\\\ ;
lir


I.

T I
t!
j -
1;
M:
u
m
i'
till:
*04 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
deliberate murder. Tell me not that
the world approves Such inhuman
cuSloms, to keep the peace of Society,
to awe the petulant, and Silence the
impertinent. But does religion Ileep
while theSe reformers are murdering
men into obedience > Does the maker
of mankind, who formed men to be
of one mind, and told them that they
were brethren, does He fit an uncon
cerned Spectator of Such tranSadions,.'

does the author of the mofl benC'
volent religion the world evh* Saw
authorize Such proceedings ? Alas! the
very contrary is the cafe! Even harflr
1
words are forbidden by that mild le-
gislator; how much more, inhuman
aflions? But am I then, the man
of Spirit exclaims, tamely to en
dure aninSult? am I to bow'before
the inSolent, and crave pardon, when
I have never offended ? by no means,
innocence
1 '!ii
iiu
•IH
tf i
t-.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 10^
innocence will always juftiSy herSelf; and men of underftanding will Support her condu6l. The challenger is generally rafh, and always prejudiced by paflion. Is it reaSonable, then, to Say nothing of religious motives, rhat I am to run the hazard of lofing my life, becaufe he cares not for his own ? is it proper that I, who, probably, am a hulband or a father, Iliould flake theSe unfinished duties againfl thedife of a profligate? or, if I am not yet engaged in thefe important characSIers of life, others, probably, demand my care. It may be, an aged parents breath depends upon my own; a filler’s happinefs, or a brother’s love; am I then to rifk all in this w'orld, and my own welfare in the next, for what ? for a point of miftaken honour; and to gratify the refentment of a rafli mortal. Think not that the world would con-


F5
demii
I
1

I i
I i
1 (
(i
i


106 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
dcmn you for declining Such a conteft.
f
Men of fenSe and virtue would rather applaud you ; and if a Sew licentious charaffers fhould not be Satisfied with theSe reaSons, be afiTured that they do not underftand them, therefore de-fpiSe their inSults.^
I have not, neither do I intend, to apply theSe arguments to your late rencontre. Your own reflexions, I doubt not, before this time, have done it for you. To- Speak my friendship h beyond my power. Live as you have hitherto done; and if once only in a man^s life he has done amifs, he need not be afraid of cenfure.
Your’s, affeXionately,
E. Seymour.
LETTER.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. IO7
•V
LETTER XLII.
MifsDara/n', to Lady Julia Harcourt.-
IVamford-HouPy Lune 28.
Congratulate you, my deareft Julia, on Mr. Drummond’s recovery, . It has relieved you from infinite anx-' iety, as you confidered yourSelf the' cauSe, ( tho’ certainly the innocent one ) of the unfortunate rencontre.
I cannot acquit Mr. Drummond of afting with duplicity; and perhaps it is.afortunate event for you that his ■ firft engagement was So Soon discovered. I hope he will leave Lord i Mordington’s as Soon as his health will . permit, as .I Iliould be Sorry you Should .
meet ;


ho8’ WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
meet him at preSent. He is Mr. Seymour’s mofb intimate friend, and many conversations we have had on this fubjedl. Seymour blames himSeli much for not endeavouring to guard his friend from fuch a fatal delufion ; his refieflions have been as painful as your own, and the favourable accounts we now receive, have relieved him from infinite anxiety.
1 hinted to Selina, in a letter, an Idea I had of changing my lituation ; you fliould have heard of it fooner, but for this melancholy quarrel which has en-grofied fo many of our thoughts. You have often told me, Julia, that I fiioiild be much happier in a married State than I was in a fingle one, but niy heart had no objedl to prefer; and ■ I looked only at a diftance at a proS-pccl which perhaps does not always
appear

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. IO9
J
appear in the moft brilliant, colours. I hit Seymour’s gentle virtues, and many amiable qualities, have been more effeiflual than all your rhetoric. I Seel all the Soft influence of that paS-Sion which has been So often the fub-je61; of the Poet’s pen, but which, till
t
now, I never could form an idea of.
I have not rafhly entered into this
engagement
From the firft moment
I became acquainted with Mr. Seymour, my heart told me he was the only man I had ever feen who could
make me happy. I took fome pains
• ♦
to banifh him from my thoughts; and I mu ft confefs that my pride was hurt, when I refle6i:ed how fteadily i had declared my intention of never marrying. I was unwilling to own my weaknefs, even to,you, my friend; and alhamed when I confidered how very
an

> 1
no WRHATH OF FRIENDSIIIF.
1 i
inconSiftent my conduO; would appear Should I indulge the partiality I Selt.. Mr. Seymour’s behaviour tome Snce I firft knew him, has been uniform, manly, and I may add, tender ; it re’ quired very little penetration to discover the preference he gave me; and his motives for concealing that pre-ference were So very generous, that his charadler Stands unrivalled. You muft pardon the Strength of-my expreffion,-as you may perceive that I view all his adions through a medium which ■ is not very apt-to magnify faults.' it’ is true, I love, him with a Sincere af-fedion,-and as my heart never before felt-the-force of this paflion, I may be-a little blind, but. all who know him praife his virtues ; they are not of the negative kind, but adive, and exerted for the good of his fellow creatures. I hayca. very particular wilh, my beloved .
I
WRE-A-T H OF F R1E N D SH I P. M I
loved friend, that you fllould be with me on this oecalion ; for tlio’ I am So truly Senlible of Mr. Seymour’s merit, and am in my own mind perfectly latisfied with the propriety of the fliepy yet I feel my Spirits will- require the kind affiftance of my Julia, to help me to Support myfelf with firmneSs. Will my dear
Lady Sr
Clair have the
goodneSs to Spare you and Selina to me, tho’ but for a Ihort time.. Plead for me, my friend, to- your mother; you have more intereii in her heart than I can boaft of, and; I doubt not your readinefs to oblige me



Mr. Seymour begs his moft reSpeft^* ful compliments, and bids me fay he will either come to Livingfton for you, or meet you in any part of the road, if
and. Lady St., Clair will but
*7-1.

112 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
t
I
I
. i
1 !
i
j I
n [
\
1..
ri
%« tt
li
,;i
i i
I
grant us tliis favour; and I will pro-niiSe .mySelf to See you Safe home again. I could urge numberleSs arguments to Show how kind I fliould efteem your preSence at this time;
but to your friendship alone I will
/
appeal. I flatter myfelf with a firft place, and in .that hope I lhall remain your moft affedionate and Sincere friend,
Eliza Darn ley.
1 >
LETTER
i|

WREATH
FR lEKDSHIP. IIJ
L,E T T E R XLIII.
The Rev. Edivard Seymours to Lord
, July i,
Incerely do I thank your Lordlhip
for your two laft favours. The
reftoration of my
given me a
*s health has
I
\
pleafurej and I now to wifh on his account, but that he may properly feel the impropriety of his conduD, and profit by his late melancholy Situation. 1 have written to him on this fubjedl:, and flatter mySelf, I fliall ere long have the happineSs of hearing from him.
y our
i
I
I 14 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Nour LorcUliip^s offers oS friend-fliip are too, agreeable not to be accepted with joy ; and I fhoiild efteem inySelf very fortunate to be able in any reSped: to give you advice which might contribute either to your preSent or future happineSs. MiSs Courtney’s behaviour meets with my warmeft approbation ; and give me leave to add, my Lord, it is rather' an ungenerous conclufion, to imagine that Ihe is not as fincerely attached to your Lordlbip as you expeded. Tho’ the votaries of love, perhaps, may not be fo clear-lighted as if they were not under that influence, yet we ought not to conclude, that a perfon who ads with propriety, in Such a fituation, does not feel; it would be (triking at the root of every heroic adion, and depriving your lively friend of one of her bright-eil ornaments. Your Lordfliip will,
I
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. II5
I am Sure, be SenSible of this when time has Soothed thoSe Sorrow's which at preSent wound your heart.	>
The different ideas of which perSons of different ages entertain, may eafily account for Lord Mordington’s earneft wifh to fee you united to Lady Julia Harcourt. You inuft be perfectly Satisfied, that it is your felicity alone his Lordfhip has in view;, and tho’ he has unfortunately chofen an improper method of expreS-fing his defire, yet, I dare venture to^ promife, he will in time be convinced of his error, and have real pleafure in allowing you to be happy in your own way. Only, my Lord, you muft follow MiSs Courtney’s advice. Do not by precipitation blaft all your future profpefts; with your Sentiments of filial reSpeft, you could never be hap-
py
(
\ f
i
I

11
2t6 wreath of friendship
py even in the poffefiion of her you moit ardently defire ; if, ,by obtaining the object of your wilhes, you forfeit the alFeflion of a father.
Your pafi life has been Spent in fuch unremitting attention to your
s
duty, and your charafler has gained fo much luftre by it, that I flatter my-felf the moment your Lordlliip will view with the calm eye of mild pbi-loSophy, ypur preSent fituation, that you never can marry MiSs Courtney under theSe circumftances. I would fuggefi; to yoii, by way of changing the -Scene, by all means to go abroad; if you can prevail with his Lordihip to give his approbation. Befides, the iiccefiity there appears to be for poor Drummond to take that ftep, as Soon as his health will permit, will be an'
excellent

i\iREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
I 17
"excellent pretence for your accompanying him.
It would have added greatly to my preSent happineSs if it had been in my power to have accepted your obliging invitation, as I Ihould have wiShed to have Seen you both before you ■leave England ; but you each feel the power of love too forcibly, to exped: me to leave at this time the obje6t of my tendereft attachment. Mils Darnley has conSented to make me happy, and I hope in a Short ^time to aflurne a new charader. We have Some flattering expedations
That Lady Julia Harcourt and MiSs Courtney will honour our nuptials 'with their preSence, which prevents me .^from requesting the favour of feein you at that time at Wansford. When tyour Lordlhip returns from the Continent,


U 1
t
llS WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
tinent, it will be no Small addition to my happineSs to have the honour of receiving you in my humble habS
tation.
E. Seymour,
\
LETTER XLIV.
ra4y Julia Harccurty to Mifs TtarnUy
/
Lwingjion-Abbey, Luly 3,
OUR letters, my dear Eliza,
have always the power of conveying a SenSible Satisfaction to my breaft; but your laft was productive of more than common pleafure. It has long been my ardent wiih to fee you fliine in the connubial ftate; with So fair a profpefl of happinefs before you, how thankful am I that my prayers
have
/
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
I 19
have been heard. Your Sentiments of a lingle life Seemed to be So firmljr rooted, that I was really afraid it would not have been eaSy to eradicate them ; but I am rejoiced to find I was miftaken. I cannot even now avoid reverting to my former ideas of old tnaid-ifm, that it is a forlorn uncomfortable State at beSt.* Even you, my friend, I have often thought were in want of Some intimate connexion, tho* Surrounded with fortune’s beft gifts. Whilst young, we can find friends enough who are ready to fail with us down the giddy dream of diffipation; but when age and infirmities oblige us to retire, and to endeavour to find that happinefs at home which w^e vainly fought abroad, how much do we then want a companion who is '	bound
* A late writer compares it to a blighted tree upon an open common.


N
-120 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
%ound to US by a firmer tye than that
■oS friendfliip. Our female friends
\
have formed other connexions, and are too bufily employed in watching the progrefs of their own families, to , attend to the happineSs of a felitary -individual.

And as to the Platonic fyfiem, I had always a very indifferent opinion of -that. I recolledt, Eliza, you once dropped a hint to me in one of your 'letters, that you wilhed Mr. Seymour, 'had been either married, or a good
4
deal older, that you might without
I
cenfure have cheriThed a friendfliip for him; of the abfurdity of that idea 1 apprehend you have been too long convinced, to make it neceffary, at -this time^ for me to enlarge upon it.
If
WREAtH FRtE‘Ni5sfil^* lit
If you will let me know when yoii have fixed your day, I will certainly - be with you the evening before, and flay for one week. I arn much obliged to Mr. Seymour' for his politeneSs in offerino; to meet me on the road: but I think it will be unnecefTary to give
P
him that trouble, as I fhall take the travelling chariot and carry my own hi^id with me. Selina is very much ^ mortified, fhe cannot be with you> but fhe has had a Httle cold, which joined t6 a hutry of Spirits at being preSent at Some un
Scenes
lately, Some of which I deScribed, and nthers of the Same nature, threw he6
into a flow fever. She was indeed very much indiSpoSed for Some days, but I hope fhe is now nearly recovered; tho’ my mother does not chooSe to trull her from home fo foon after her
confinement.

Vol. II.
G
Poor
122 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Poor Wellbury’s diftreSsat the time file was lick, is not to be deScribed; how tenderly is he attached to her! I cannot help daily lamenting, that two people, So forpied to confer happinefs on each other, Ihould thus be forever Separated, by the ill nature and caprice of a petulant old man. I beg hisLordfhip’s pardon, but lanTentirely out of patience with him.
I fear, my Selina,” Said Weftbury to .her, this morning, that I give you pain by my very great anxiety for your recovery; you absolutely Seem to Suffer as if you were diftreffed, vvhen I am in company with you, by the energy I cannot refrain from fliewing for your welfare : But it Shall not be always thus; I will not be.the conftant cauSe of uneafmeSs to the woman, whom of all others, I willi to make
the
WREATHOF FRIENDSHIP. 12^
the moft happy. As Soon as I am con» vinced you are quite well, I will in-ftantly go abroad.’^ Abroad, my Lord,” Said Selina, lifting up her fine eyes to his, ‘‘Surely you have no
thoughts of that.” “ Indeed i have,” Said he, “ nay, I am Serioufiy determined upon it; do you think I can fee and converle with you confiantly, daily behold fo many proofs of your num-berleSs qualifications, and Hill remain under the cruel reftriftions you and my father have laid on me of never calling you mine ? and on the other hand, is it pofSible that I Ihould remain in the fame kingdom' with you, and yet de-barmySelf the pleafure of beholding you? No,'my charming girl, believe me, that is a talk too hard for me to 4mpoSe upon my Self.”
O 2-
<<
If
Ill
t i
i: r
I .
(
j
I

w
T; • :
« ; » !
tt
!
1 ■ 'I
t
N
124 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
If Such is your determination^^ Said
\, _
Selina,’’ let me intreat you to alter it. I Ihall be mod unhappy in coniidering myfelf as the caufe of your banifli-ment. Your country has a claim upoi you. If fuch members of the community as Lord Weftbury will not re-fide at home, where Shall we look for examples. Your father has a right to demand your fociety ! let me now, my Loid, have the fatisfatdion of hearing you fay, you will not, at lead; for forae time, go abroad,” He bowed his head, but made her no anfwcr. So much for the obScinacy of mankind thought 1; give them but time to form an opinion, right or wrong, and all the perfuafionin the world cannot overturn it.
Poor Selina’ I doubt flie wdll long be the vidtim of a hopelefs paiiion 1 Left
you

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
125
you Iliould imagine more of the inhabitants of Livingfton-Abbey may be' in the fame fituation, I think it necef- ■ fary to inform you, that I ‘ am entirely' reftored to my reaSon, and behold ' Drummond’s ad ions in the true lights and upon cool refledion cannot help thinking them ungenerous to the lalb degree. It was all at the beginning, friendfhip and flirtation, fo far it was very well; but did he not fometimes endeavour to introduce a little love, particularly in a little Jeu d.Dfprit, he Sent me with a dart; and if it was all friendfliip, why was the name of Mademoifelle de Sanzey fo carefully avoided. I am not quite Sure that I hold Selwyn’s behaviour in fuch abhorrence as I did when he went away. Had he behaved better about the duel, I could eaSily have forgiven him
G3
for
I i
it : i|
I '
l! 1
I
1
r
I t
I
:	i
i i
ii
i i
fll
i «
'■	t
;	!
‘II
l!0
II.
ifi
■> \' i'
. r
t >
tt L
!c
u i: i»; ■
ti;
i <!
u
i
!l!l :
I!!! '
il!i I
: I
1 I:
t I >
i I ‘' I 11 !
ti:
'Hi'


126 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
for being the firft perSon that mentis.
oned the French lady.
It appears to me now very plain,.
that Drumnir-ad had lixed upon this
plan for the amuSement of a few leiSure
hours, whilst he was obliged to flay
in England, till he could once more return to his beloved Rojhhia. A very
flattering consideration for me to be
Sure! I have one more idea to Suggeft
o you, and then I have done with the
fubjeft forever. Don’t you think that
J .ord W^eftbury might have hinted to
me that there w^as Such a lady in exil!'
ence,without violently infringing either
ihe laws offriendJJnp or honourP I am
no great judge of thefe nice points be-
tween men, but I-think that might
have been done with a very little
management,
We
^ V
^ 9
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I27
We are informed that Mr. Selwyn is at Paris-, living in high Style ; that he is quite the ton, and an iiniverSal favourite with the ladies. He certainly can be an agreeable companion when \icpleafis. Mr. Drummond goes away in the morning, Sol hope i fliall be Spared the pain of feeing him any more.
Adieu, my dear friend ! I fear I have taken up too much of your time at prefent, when you have more important concerns to think of. I Shall not
I
write again before I fee you; that it may be in happy times, and on an happy occafion, is the fincere prayer of your
Julia Harcourt*

O 4
LETTER
I
I

liS- WEATH OF ?RIlNDaHl?
. I
LETTER XLV.
Drummond,, ESq. to the Rev.
E* Seymour*
' I
I
; >
t
'* \ h

f'
. i
#
Wejihury,-Lodge-, Luly. 3.
EYMOUR, behold the pen oncq more in the hand of your friend; and wielded in your Service, to whom every thing is due, that reaSon or gratitude can inSpire. What fliall I fay to you, deareft, beft of men, for the pains you have taken to make me worthy of efteem, fince the firft mo* ment of our acquaintance ? never hill now was your vidory complete. But I think you will do me the juflice to believe me, when I fay, that my prelent fentiments agree entirely with your laft letter 3 that before it arrived
they-

WREATH OFTRIENDSHIP, I29
they had undergone a thorough change. It has convinced me on a fubje6t which perhaps I had not Sufficiently considered; it has confirmed me in re6titude; and I hope I fhall no more deviate from thoSe principles you So nobly enforce. I tremble at the idea of having been thought by you So guilty as 1 really was; I find now, that to look with indifference upon errors^ is one Step towards the CornmifJion of crimes; and when So far advanced, the defcent is eafy, gradual, and certain. How difficult is it to rife to the fummit of virtue ? bur even this I will attempt; and affifled by your friendly arm, I fear not to attain a height fb defirable, if any hu man. mind may So preSume*
As my firft atonement, I write to , to offer her an unworthy
G5
band.
ii
.1 •
/
4*.
•i*
ir

j
»
IJ
1^0
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
hand, but which Ihe alone has an^ right to, if Ilie thinks it acceptable. I dare not fay I give with it a heart, be-cauSe, in truth, I cannot add that is mine to give; but time and abSence from the Scenes whicli lately made me happy, will, I hope, teach me to think on this, as on every other Subjed, as becomes a man who profelTes himSelf your friend. Chance, and my delirium, discovered to my father and mother this fatal Secret; it is their earneft, willi that I Ihould fulfil my engagements as Soon as my health is reflored. How good are they to me!
and what have they not fuiFered for an
* ♦ • -----------------
uhdeServing Son! I am a beggar in gratitude to every creature round me; and the reft of my life, however long, will Scarce Suffice me to diScharge the
debt.
N either
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I3I
Neither my head nor my hand is equal to a long letter. Farewel, my dear friend; nobody can rejoice So much at your approaching happineSs, as your faithful
H.Di 'uni'rnond.
LETTER XLVI.

lIenry Drummond, Efq. to
MaddmoifeUe Sanze)\
JVefibury-Lodgey Luly 3.
OSALIA, what will you fay to
your truant lover, who, forgetful of the vows he Swore at your feet, had Suffered himfelf to be captivated by an Englifh beauty ? Trembling and fearful he dares to be fin-cere ; to confefs his crime,- to deprecate>
your,
I ' o
! I
' I i
I t
i
\
\ 1
: i
f :
; I 1 !
1
\ I
! I
1 i
i I
I	r
*	l
f '
! ;
\ :
I :
) .
j i
I
.	«
f	t

I I
{ i
152
WREATH OF^FRIENDSHIP,
your anger, and even to Sue for your for-iveneSs, He offers you a hand truly unworthy your acceptance; but led by the virtues in your train, he trulls it will, not always remain So. He can offer you alSo a pleafing reception in this country, from thoSe, who, affured of.your merit, are defirous to call you by the endearing name of daughter; and who will endeavour to affift their fon in making amends for his pad negleclo
Yon, my dear Mademoifelle de Sanzey, are the arbitreSs of my fate; fay but you wiih to See me, and ! fly over Sea and land to obey the Summons. All my future life fliall be fpentto make you happy; and , to a* tone for the treaSon I have been guilty
of againft love.
_ • ¥’ ■
Had I been in health
^ \
1 fhould long ere now have been ia
i 1
\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
T <9
perSon at Paris; but a Severe illneSs, from which I have Scarce yet recovered, obliges me to write what I So much wifli to Say. As Soon as I Iliall receive your anSwer, I hope to be able
to obey your commands, Monfieur
#
V	1
and Madame de Sanzey who were not ignorant of our engagement, will. have no objedion, I think, to ratify it on the. terms I firll propoSed; to
them I preSent my moft reSpe6i;ful.
V-
devoirs; to you, RoSalia, every thin you can delire, from an afSedionat®
H.	Drummond.

LETTE
V.
!i
li I
» ! i
()
I *
; I	■
' _	«
' 1
I I
: ! ! I
'ii
i 1 : ' ' «
’ 1 :
i)
{ . I
M
ii!
»
I >
f >
1 :
H;
■1!
if’
t*
ii!
»t»

M :
I
f


U ■
i
134 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
L.E.TTER XLVII
0
Mifs Darnley, to I^atfy Julia Harcoiirt,
dVansford-Houfey July iy.
Have this moment received your favour, my Julia; it has revived my almoft drooping Spirits, by the kind alTurance, that I fliall have your Supporting preSence. I lincerely regret poor Selina’s illneSs on her account,' and I am afraid, not much leSs on my own. , It would have given me great plealure to have Seen the dear girl at Wansford; but tho’ 1 am denied that fatisfadlion at preSent, I will hope, in teitureto be mere fortunate. You de-fire me to tell you when you muft come, the moment^'ou receive this letter^
as.
>..
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
ns
/
as Thursday is the day fixed. I have thought So often and So deeply upon this Subject, that I Seel mySelf a coward; and never in my life had more occasion Sor your Support than at preSent. I See my gravity gives pain to the only man in the world I ever wilhed to pleaSe; and yet notwithftanding all my endeavours, I cannot conceal it, I ardently wifh you were here, as your vivacity would at leafl make my feelings not So confpicuous. I will not indulge mySelf in writing any longer, as 1 find the fubiedt would be inex-
^	vV..
hauflible.
My bell thanks to Lord and Lady St. Clair, for Sparing you to me; but my Julia, talk not of one week ; remember how very long it is fince you have favoured me with a viiit, and at What a time you will be with me.
My

\
\
136. WREATH OP FRIENDSHIP.
My befl wiChes and love to my dear

N
Selina; I hope you will bring a better
account of her health. Your^s, my
Julia
Eliza Darnleji

L E T T E R XLVm
/
Jjxdy Julia Harcourt, to Mils Courtnty.
Wansford-Eoufe, Julyy,
WELL knew before I came from
hpme how tenderly I loved you,
my Selina; but, believe me, till I was
parted from you, I was not Sufficiently
acquainted how neceflary you were to
my happineSs. Tho* enjoying the
company of my dear Eliza, I am every
moment in want of you; Some rew

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
137
idea ftrikes me, which I wilh to com-murucate to youor if any thing gives me pleaSure, it loSes half its joy be-caufe you do not Iliare it with me, ThoHt is but a few hours ago lince I parted with you, I donk feel inclined to take any reft till I have given you fome account of my journey ; and as the fcribbling mania Seems to be upon at prefent, I think it quite as well to indulge it.
me
We rolled brifidy along all the morning with a bright funfhine and clear Iky, which promifed a much longer continuance than we experienced in the fequel; and was an excellent lelTon, to Ihew us how tranfient are all Sublunary bleffings. About four in the afternoon we, were overtaken by one of the moll dreadful
ftorms I ever heard. The thunder
ivared
:i!
• 1
l^S WREATH OF FRIEND SHI FT
roared inceffantly, and the lightning
V
came in Such quick Succeeding fiafhes,
that it was impoITible to diSdngiiilh
them. It did not Suit the nerves either
of poor Anne or my Self; bur as there
was no fhelter near, and the horfes
went very quietly, we were obliged to
I

and there-
fore fat patiently trembling in the
corner of the carriage, waiting the tin
certainty of our fate. We had not
proceeded far in this way before \vc

were Stopped by a phaeton and four,
which had taken poffellion of the mid'
die of the road. Three or four Servants
were vainly endeavouring to appeafe
the unruly horfes, who were So much
terrified at the lightning, that it was
impoffible to hold them; and inftantly
as we came up to them, overturned the
vehicle, and threw their poor mafter
at Some diflance. The gentleman did
not
wreath of friendship-.
1-39:
not appear to be much hurt; but the: Servant toldVVilliam, he feared the carriage was So much broken, it would be impoSIible for his mafter to get into it again ; and as the rain was beginning to be very heavy, and there was no houfe near, he muft be very much wet before he got to Wansford, a village, ^about ten miles off, where he was going. He Said his mailer’s nam Lord Malbourne. As Soon as William informed me of all thefe circum-ftances, I Sent to offer his Lordfhip an alfylum in my chariot; which he very thankfully and politely accepted. He is a very elegant young man indeed, almoflas handfome as Weftbury, Selina, and feems about his age.
e was
As the ftorm abated my Spirits.
arofe ; and in a fhort time w^e entered
•\ -
into a little chat. He Said he was
going
/

II
n
i\
li
b:
M
U'

( r ‘ ‘ ^ f I 1
■ I
b’l
is.
. »
I I
li.
■4:.
11'
'll;
:: I
'iii ,0 *
: h
nil
11

It '
lO
r
■ 1 I
hi
li
d
I!
M
I;
li
• fi t
V
140 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
going upon a vilit, or he fliould rather
fay to officiate as bridegroom man to
Mr. Se}^mour. I told him that I Sup-#
poSed to-morrow we Ihould both be
giiefts under the fame roof, as I was
going to act in the fame capacity to
Mifs Darnley. You may believe he
took that opportunity of faying fome
polite things j how much he was re
joiced that he was not imme
diately to part with his newly acquired
acquaintance, &c. &c.
He affied me if I knew Mr, Sey
mour ? 1 faid, I had not yet that plea-
fure, thd. Mifs Darnley was my parti-
cular friend. He faid he would ven
ture to affirm I flaould receive great
pleaSare from his acquaintance, as he
was a mod amiable cfiarafter; every
body that knew him loved him; he
was happy to have it in his power to
fay
t
fijl'
I i
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
TAl
fay, that Mr. Seymour was one his moft intimate friends; he could not i<fay the mojl intimate, as they were a Trio at College, and he believed they had an equal regard for each other. I Said, that was, I believed, a very lingular cafe; that it was much more common to fee two bound in a league of friendship, than three. He an-Swered, it had always been the caSe with them, that he had flattered him-felf with meeting his other friend, Mr,
, Drummond, to night; but from a few hafty lines he had received fronr him
/
the day before, he found he Ihould be disappointed^ I afked him if he knew Lord Weftbury, ( as he feemed to be all in our own way a very little^ v/hen Weftbury joined us, Drummond and he came to England, and 1 went into Germany, where I remained till v^'ithin tilde few weeks.
When
1-42
^VREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.

/
When we arrived at Wansford-LlouSe I was about to take leave of my companion, when we perceived Mr. Seymour at the fide of the carriage. His Surprise and aftonilhment was very great to fee his friend feated So quietly by me. I availed mySelf of the joy they exprelFed'at meeting after So many months Separation, to flip from them, and run into the houSe, where I found Eliza anxioufly waiting for me ; our pleafure was not inferior to that -of the gentlemen. She appeared in better'fpirits than I expedled from her letter; but there was a fedate-nefs in her manner, if I may fo ex-prefs my Self, that was pleafing to me. I could not have patience with a woman that fhould adt with the fame unconcern, on the eve of a day that was to determine her future happinefs
of
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
H'B
or miSery .for life, as at any other
time.
We were very Soon joined by the two gentlemen, and explanations and introdudlions took place on all lides. Eliza lamented much that you .could not be with us. I wifli you had ever been here, that you might form an Idea of the elegant limplicity that reigns thro’ the whole of this delightful
'manlion. We were in a fmall draw-
• •
iing room that looks into the garden, which might truly be Said to be “Sweet as Eglantine after a Shower.” The falhes wTre thrown open, and the woodbine and jelTamine that twined around the window, difpenfed the moft agreeable perfume through the ayhole room.
The

ji
I
Wj i
^Sf!
Ji
m : ^
:M:
I'll: '
:L'
:|f i i bi

9 >
!l
I»
I f
< i
ii
i 1
u
•\ •
!'•
U i
-♦ t
;i t
f' ■,
lb
!‘i
!b
11.
il!
It
1! t t
[ ; I i
y t
t44 WREATH OF FRI ENTSHIF.
*
The uSual compliments were Scarcig over, when Lord Malbourne recurred once more to the fubjedl I wilhed So much he Ihould be iilent upon. “I
was much Iliocked, Seymour,” Said
#
he, Ho receive a fliort letter from Drummond, a day or-two ago, where-in he told me he had been dangeroudy Wounded in a duel; that a lady was the cauSe of it; but he referred me to you for particulars. I am convinced
V.	•
liis antagonift muft either have been very headfirong, or behaved very illj for I donh think Drummond would willingly have engaged in an affair of that kind.” Seymour call a glance to^ wards Eliza, as if he had Said, “Ihalll give your friend pain, if I enlarge upon this Subject J*” Eliza looked towards me, and 1 iani afraid my countenance father betrayed too much perturbation for them to think I was quite indif»
ferent

f
s*


in Sup
\
WRtAtH dF FRIENDSHIP. 14|
N.
ferent on the Subjeft. I was appre~ henSive the Silehce would grow quite diflreffing, and began to think it incumbent upon me to ftep forward | and therefore niuftering up all my resolution, I laid, yoii only do your
friend juftice,’’ my Lord,
*
poSmg his antagonist to have behaved ill; he certainly is the m.oft impetuous of all human beings ; and I believe Mr. Drummond could tiot have acted otherwise than he did, according to
modern ideas of the lawS of honour.
*
He is nearly recovered, n^ySelf to Seymour^ he left Lord Mordington’s on Tuefday, and I be
If
yy
addrefhno'
O'
to
eno^aoemcnt
o o
lieve in a fliort time intends coinp' to
O O
France to fulfil his
f
there.” To you, Selina, I muft con-feSs, and only to you I would do it, that my heart feemed to link as I pronounced the laft words; and it was
Vol. II.
H
w i l h

%
>! t •
1^^
III
ill
II'

1
146 WREATH OF FRIENTSHIT*
with difficulty I could articulate thenii
am Sorry for it,” Said Lord Mai*
bourne, ‘‘I do not think an union with
RoSalia can ever be produdlive of hap-
pinefs to.Drummond; I Saw a good
deal of her the lafl: time I was in Paris;
fhe is almoft ignorant of the world, by
having been fo long confined in a con
vent; beftdes, there is a levity in her
manner, which to
a
perSon of our
friend’s known good fenfe, and keen-
neSs of observation, can never be
agreeable in one he is to Spend his life
with.

“ I am not fo well acquainted
with Mademoifelle de Sanzey as you
are,” Said Seymour, and therefore
cannot fo eaSily judge of her merits; to
me there is one infuperable objedion
to an union, and that is the difference
of their religious tenets; but that ought
to have been confidered before an en-
gagement had been entered into; I be-
lieve
t/ r
\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I47
/
lieve he cannot now retreat with ho*
nour.’’ Very fortunately the Servant entered with tea, and put an end to a conversation, which you, my dear girl, who know my heart, will readily believe could not be agreeable to^ me. I SuppoSe, before they cometo-mor-row, Seymour will have let his friend a little into the Secret; -and he will be more Sparing of his observations on that Subje(5t.
The cemiemen took their leave at eight oklock; Eliza ar>d I Spent a
i
comfortable eveninp;. Sdie laid onen
O	t
her whole heart to me; indeed, I think file has every proSpeD of hap-pineSs with Mr. Seymour. He, is one of the Inoft agreeable men I ever Saw; and appears to be particularly eaSy and elegant in conversation. 1 believe it is full time for me to conlider that I
H z
hav
ilii ‘ill
ill
"ii
Hi

It!.'!' '
i?i
IV
* ■
ft
u
i«:
'I
!i!(-
if!!
pi
•'r.
iii
;

; I
■\
:/
/
24S WREATH OF FRIEKDSHn**
have to rife early to dreSs for cliurcli* I wish to-morrow was over, I feel my-felf a coward even at the thoughts of
Eliza’s wedding*
I don’t know
how I Should evir get over my
own.
f.-
When you write, you muft tell me all Weflbury fays and does ; I am deeply interefted in all your fcenes* I have written a few lines to my mo* ther ; if more particulars are wanted, you will be fo good as to give them, Good night, my dear girl; believe me, no fituation can alter the unchangeable affedion that is felt for you, by your
yalia HarcoutU
LETTER
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I49
LETTER XLIX
Mils Courtneyy to Lady Julia Harcourt.
Living lion-Abbey, Jidy 10.
rrAHE voice of mirth has not been i heard in this dwelling Since your departure, my ever dear Julia ; but I will not diminilh the real pleaSure I flatter my Self you will have in your excurfion, by a relation of the want we have of your Society. The Servant that conveys this letter to you is likewiSe the bearer of a whole pacquet of congratulations from every individual of the family, to Mr. and Mrs. SeymourI Sincerely hope our prayers and good wiflies will be heard, and that they will
HS
enjoy
V
ICO WREx\TH OF FR lENDSHlP.

enjoy as much felicity as can be the lot of moitaiity.
As you were not here to make ord. in our uSual walk yefterday evening, I betook mySelf to our favourite bower in the Ihrubbery. I was a good deal Surprized, on entering, to find I>ord \Veftbury already Seated there. ‘‘ I have been waiting, my Selina,” Said he, “ anxioufiy waiting, this hour pad, for your arrival; hill I had
almoft begun to deSpair
» ((

It is very
extraordinary, my Lord,’Haid I, ‘That
you Ihould wait here at all for me,
when it was mere accident that di-
redled my deps towards this place; *
and much more probable that I Ihould not come to night.^’ “ I cannot agree with you,’^. Said he, “ it is the very place in the world that your friend and you have always chofen for mutual con-
verSe;
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 15s
verSe; every Secret and Sentiment of
^	J	.
both your hearts have been diScloSed
v'
in this facred grove; and consequently the firft leiSure moment you had after her departure, this was the moft likely place for you to * retire to, that you ■might contemplate on your fliend,and preSent to your imagination what were her employments and thoughts at that inftant. It is to this place, my dear girl, I flatter mySelf you will Sometimes retire when your Weftbury is far dillant, and call to mind the many vows of mutual love and conftancy that we have So often plighted in this, happy Spot. We Ihall perhaps not have many more meetings before that time arrives; unlei^ you will revoke that Sentence, my Selina, which you have So cruelly paffed againSl me, and Suffer me to claim you as my wife. I could almofl; venture to alTure you of
H 4
polite
3^2
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
polite treatment, if not affeDion, from my father; and if that is not the cafe, I will paSs my word he Shall never fee you. You well know the joy, the fa-tisfaDion, I Ihould have in devoting my whole life to procure your hap pi-neSs.” I told him I would not Scruple to confeSs I did a violence to my inclination in refuling any requefl he made
£o me, but I had drawn a line of con-
*
du6t for my future life, which I looked upon to be the path of reiflitude; and I trufled that no folicitations, how-ever agreeable, would tempt me to deviate from it. “ If fuch is your determination,’’ faid he, very few weeks longer will I remain in England; but I have one requeft more to make, one little requeft which I think you 'muft comply with; that is, of Suffering me to become your correspondent when I am abroad.”
You
“WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
15^
(e
You absolutely Seem to helitate even at that, Selina ; are von deter-mined to refuSe every thing I alk ? can there be any impropriety in corresponding with the man you have vow-^ ed to love.^ I know your motives to be delicate, and cannot help adm.iring : them ; tho’ you muft excuSe me,- my -amiable girl, if I fay I think you Some- -times extend them too far. .Dut I will,: not urge you further on this fubjedt at preSent; I will apply to Lady Julia,
I know She will not refufe to receive a . line now and then, nor. perhaps Scruple occalionally to return an anSwer to. >
her/rit^ii^/W’eltbury.’C' To this
poSal you may believe I did not ob-jedl; and we converSed on various^ topics,, to us intereftingj tho’ to you they would be tedious, until the cool
pro-
breezes of the evening reminded us it was time to return to the houSe. Lord
H 5
Weftbury
x54 wreath of friendship.
X
\
Weftbury went with me, he flayed Supper, but was uncommonly grave
the whole evenino-.
\
After I had retired to my
own
room. Lady St. Clair came to me. i You are So much accuftomed to a little Social chat at this time, my dear Selina,’Taid She, that I am afraid you will be melancholy if your are left entirely to yourSelf; 1 am therefore come to offer you my company for half an hour.’^ Oh! my Julia! how fliall I ever make a Suitable return to your dear mother for her many in-Ibances of attention to me. I told her every thing that had pafSed between Lord Weflbury and my Self in our evening conversation; fhe approved very • much of my condudt. I particularly applaud you, my love,^’ Said jQie, ‘‘ for not allowing him to hope
for
;V4'.'y


WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I55
for a correspondence with you ; tho*
t
f	^
1 have not the flightelt doubt or your mutual attachment, yet, after all, many things may prevent your ever
t
being united; and tho’ I look upon Lord Wellbury to be a man of the ftrifteft honour, it mull always be an unpleaSant refledion for a young woman, that any gentleman has letters of her’s in his poITeffion in which love has been the principal Subjed. I am confident, Julia would enjoy a correspondence with him very much, and would not have the Smalleft Scruple about anSwering his letters. As I have mentioned Julia, I cannot help adding, I am not perfedly Satisfied in my mind about her; I am apprehenfive Ihe has not yet got over her attachment, which was but too vifible, for. Mr. Drummond.’^
a
I ft
I.;56 wreath of friendship
L
Is

When Lord Weftbury told us
*%
few days ago that Mr. Drummond was one, and he believed in a Short time ivoiild be- in France, a deep glow over-
Spread her face, wdiich was Succeeded
%
by the moSt deadly paleneSs I ever beheld ; I could not help obServing that the, attempts Ilie made for a lively Sally during the remainder of the evenings were entirely forced. I do not Say this, my dear Selina, with a view tc discover your Sentiments upon the Sub' jedl, ( for I believe you are entir in her confidence, and I willi you long to remain So,) but’merely to eaSe. my own heart, which I afilire you has
Suffered for Some time on her ac-
'•* 'A
count.” I told Lady St. Clair, I thought there was not the leaft oc-
c.aSion for her uneafineSs \ that I was-
■<.
confident you Saw Mr. Drummond's
^adion?.:
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
aclions exa(5ily in the Same light we did; and if there were any traces of chagrin or melancholy yet remaining upon your mind, I hoped this little excurfion, and the gaiety of the Scenes in which you are engaged, would entirely diflipate them. I hope So too,’’^' faid Lady St» Clair, ‘^and as hope is the chearing balm of our exiftence, and both you and I Seem to be. at preSent in a little want of it, I wilL wifh you a good night, with that Sweet imprelTion fixed upon your mind, and flatter myfelf it will be the-means of your enjoying pleaSant Hum-
yy
Yoiir mother’s good willies did not prevail, for Weftbury’s journey had taken , too deep hold of both
mj
I cS WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.

my head and heart, to Suffer tne to reft.
I dread the time of his departure, and yet am almoft tempted to wifli him gone. That I may ■ Support mySelf properly when the trying time arrives of bis taking leave, is the conftant prayer of.

Your ever affectionate friend.
Selina
LETTER
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I59
LETTER
L
Rev. Edward Seymour., to Henry
Drummond, ESq.
Wansford-Houfe, "July n,
Efterday, my friend, the lovely Eliza made me. the happieSt of human beings! She gave me her hand at the altar; and with it, I have the Satisfaction of reflecting I received her heart. Few are capable of feeling the tranfport that at this moment glows ‘ in my bread:; it is from, the pure Source of true love! a lovefo ardent,. So fincere, that it far exceeds my power to defcribe it. I am Sure your generous heart will Share in the happi-nefs your friend enjoys, which is
much Superior even to thofe fancied

l6o . WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
pleaSures the poet So oSten deScribes;
%
9
it is unmixed with one bitter ingre-
dient, and all my future exiftence
Shall be Spent in endeavouring deferve it.
to
\yill you forgive me for making my own joy the firft Subject of my
pen

Think not, my Drummond,
that the happy Scenes around me have for a moment baniShed. from my mind thofe cares which opprefs my friend. No, believe me, the pleasures I now enjoy, I flatter mySelf will enlarge my benevolence, and make me a friend to all mankind.
I am fo accustomed to Ihare in all your Sorrows, and your joys, that I fhould think myfelf deprived of mv -right were you not to entrufl; me with . tliem,_ You tell me you are going to ,
’	write ‘
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
l6l
write to RoSalia ; the moment you receive her anSvver let me hear from you. I am almoftas anxious for it as you can be. My earneft prayer is, that Ilie may determine whatever may be the moft likely way to make you
happy.
I am afraid your health is not yet perfedlly reftored. The moment Lady Drummond can fpare you, come to Wansford. My Eliza will alTift me in endeavouring to reftore. you to eaSe and tranquility. We will pour the balm of comfort into your wounded heart; and if we cannot entirely cure thofe Sorrows which you feel, we will, by fharing them, endeavour to make them leSs,
Lady Julia talks of Spending but one week with her friend. I hope we
fliall
i6i
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
Iliall prevail on Malbourne to flay longer. He wrote to Inform you that he was coming; if you could conveniently join him here, it would be a great addition to the pleaSure I enjoy in hig company; and in our triple friend-fliip we would forget thofe Sorrows which adverfe fortune has made as
feel. Has Lord Weftbury left England yet? if he has not, tell him I fhall efteem a continuance of his correspondence a favour; and give him my befl wifhes for his Safe return.
My Eliza bids me join her befl wifhes with my own for you, and intreats you will favour us with your company as Soon as you find travelling not to be inconvenient to you.
You know not how many charms Wansford-HouSe can boaft of; come
and
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
and Ihare them with one who glories
in now calling you friend.
£. S,
LETTER LI.
#
Lady Julia Harcourt, to MiSs Courtney,
PVamford-Houfe, July 12,
Otwithftanding all the fine things
we have heard Drummond Say
of this Mr. Seymour; or to go Hill fur-
.ther, notwithstanding all our Sanguine

imaginations, we have not been able to
do juftice to the original charader; if
you will allow me to be a judge from
fo Short an acquaintance. I am ab-
solutely in danger of falling in love
with him; and Should be almoft
tempted
/
164 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
tempted to grudge Eliza So great a bleffing, did I not know that he is much better Suited with a wife than he could have been with Such a giddy creature as mySelf.
His behaviour yefterday was enchanting ; Such a manly - tenderneSs when he addreffed Eliza, and at the Same time So much eaSy politeneSs ta the reft of the company, that it was impoffible not to admire him. I have often heard it remarked, that a wedding day muft of neceffity be a ftupid one; this was quite the reverSe, for my own part I have not been in Such good Spirits for Some time paft; it was a real Satisfaction to me to fee my friend give her hand to a man, who appeared every way calculated to make her happy.
The
V/REAtH 6T FRIENDSHIP.
l6j
The company was not large. Mrsj Morton was there of courSe* Her hap^ piiieSs, poor woman ! was of that kind, which may be felt but not de-
scribed.
She loves Eliza with the
tendernels of a . parent, and could not look ftedfaftly at her all the day^ without her eyes being filled with tears. I can readily fuppofe many ideas would obtrude themSelves, when Ihe confidered that not long ago all her felicity aroSe from being united to the man, whoSe place Se}'mour at preSent occupiesi Tho’ l am certain her joy was fincereupOn this occalion; yet it is natural to imagine, that it would be of the pathetic kind. Mr< Watfon performed the ceremony.
therefore of courSe, he and hb
*
Were preSent at dinner; Mn Hargrave, a near neighbour of Eliza’s, who has at different times been very Serviceable
*<
i
l65 WRUATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
able to her in tranSaSling money matters, a6led in the capacity of father^ His vviSe, and a niece from London, who is at preSent paying them a vilit, made the whole of our party. MiSs Hargrave is a Smart pretty, little girl, much Superior to the City MiSs we had
I think She would
have been a very fine girl, hut llie has
at Livinglton.
I
very
falhionable boarding
School,
which has given the poor young lady rather too high an opinion of her own accomplifliments; and the little phraSe o^we dofo in Lown, She finds very applicable upon all occaSions.
I
file
has, Somehow or other, contrived to make an acquaintance amohgfi the officers of the guards ; and they are
in' her estimation, the criterion of
every


' F	9
’WREATH OP FRIENDSHIP. IO7
every thing that is great, elegant, or accomplilhed.
it unfortunately brought to
After dinner, we had infenSbly, drawn Lord Malbourne to Speak of his travels in Germany. He was .giving us a very interefting account of the country,, and the manners of the people ; happening to mention nightly the discipline of the Pruffian troops,
MiSs Hargrave’s recolledion ( who
I
had kept a painful lilence Some time ) an anecdote of a friend ofher’s in the guards. She made not the leaf!. Scruple of interrupting his Lordlhip, and wry obligingly related the whole -ftory, which took up above half an hour in telling. Not that there was much in the ftory, but it was interlarded with So many pretty exclamations, and French phraSes, that if you have ever fo great
ait

i68 WRtAtH OF rRtENDSHif*.
hn inclination to hear it, my dear Selina, you muftexcuSe my repeating it) for I declare my Self perfedly unqiia-lified to give even the pith, if, by the
by, it had any in it. She had however
»
fo effeitluallv broken the thread of Mai-
*/
bourne’s narrative, that all attempts to join It again were ineffedlual; and
we Soon after left the room.
In the
\
evening we had a little concert ; MiSs Hargrave favoured us with feveral of the mod fadiionable Italian airs. You tannot imagine how many ways She found of charming usi I began t(?i
4
fuppoSe before the day was over, that tho’ Lord Malbourne had not the honour to hold a commifiion. in the guards, yet a little of his attention would be tolerably received by the young lady; to fay truth, it would encreaSe her conSequence not a little,
to
WREATH OF FRIENTSHTF.
to be introduced in town, by the title of Lady Malbourne*
The Servant is juft arrived with all your congratulatory epillles ; and what is much more valuable to me, has brought me your’s, my dear Selina. How much do I with I had been at home at this time. l am afraid Lord Weftbury will be gone before I can polSibly return again ; but you muSl:, my beloved friend, exert all your fortitude upon this trying occalion. I well know how much you will both 'eel, but as the evil feemis at prefent to be inevitable, we mull fubmit with patience, and look forward with hope to more Smiling days of peace and tranquility. Tell him I like the idea of becoming his correspondent amazingly ; we have long called each other friend, and I hope now to

Vol, II.
I
reap
iYijO WREATH OF FRlEHDSHIjP.
reap both amufement and jnflrudioR from the title.
d am extremely pained that my mother-Should imagine I Suffer any thing on Drummond’s account. I did not think that Ihe fuSpeded me of ever having had the penchant for him ; and I likewiSe thought I had too much fal volatile in my compofi-tion, to have forever freed me from the charge of, hopeleSs love. Neither my mother nor you mufl ever indulge one Serious thought upon thatfubjed. I frankly acknowledge, I did at one x\mQ very much A dm ire Mr. Drummond,; there is a ctnKm fomething in his con^ verSation and manner, that is exactly Suited to my tafte; but ^circum-flances have So happened fince that time, that tho* I Ihall ever moft lin* ,cerely pray for his happineS§, I have
not
r •
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP,
I7I
Rot one wiIli remaining to lhare it ■\yithliim. You will believemy Selina, when it is ferioujly attefted the hand of your
\ytiHa IiarcouYU
L E T T E R LII.
Mils Loundey^ to Lady Julia Harcourt.
LinJingfion-Abbeyy July 13s
ORD and Lady St. Clair are juft gone to take their morning’s airing. I have excuSed mySelf from attending them, that I might indulge mySelfin dedicating one hoar to you,, my dear Julia. But I am afraid it is a Selfilli gratification: for I feel mv Spirits at preSent too much opprefled
I z
to
1^2 WREATH OF FRIENBSHIT.
. ••
to permit, my Society being any amufe-mcnt. ;It is only .to indulge my Sorrow, by;,pouring it into the boSom of
friendship, that has at this time in-
••
4uced m,e to take up my pen.
This day Lord Weftbury leaves our neighbourhood, and Sets out for Sir Henry Drummond’s previous to his going abroad. I am rather ap-prehenfive he is already gone. You can Scarce imagine how much that idea torments me. Tho’ I dreaded, beyond any thing, to take leave of him, yet So weak, So inconfiftent am I, that it mortifies me beyond expreffion to think he Ihould leave the Kins-^
O
dom without feeing me. He Spent the evening with us yefterday ; when he went away, he -Said he. fliould call to take lea/ve of us this moi'ninp-; but
,	U-)
at the dme he Spoke he lool:ed at me
with
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
173,
with So much tenderneSs, that I even
then dreaded his intention.
This
morning has confirmed all my fears, for I am certain he muft have Set for- ■ .ward before this time ; and yet, believe me, Julia, I have not flrength of mind enough to venture to make an enquiry. I now think it would have been a greater Satisfadion to have Seen him once morej yet why do I think fo ? ReaSon and refledibn perhaps
s
will Soon convince me that it is better as it is.
Pen at night*'.
4
I was agreably interrupted in the ■ mid ft of all my conje<5tures and petulance, by the entrance of Lo'*d Wefl-bury. I felt as much relieved for the moment, as if he had abfolutely put off his journey; but this pleafing de-
J 3
luSion

H4 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
/
Iiifion was of Short continuance, and my imagination inSlantly returned to all the miseries of feparation. It was in vain I endeavoured to conceal my emotion. He Seated himSelf by me, and taking my hand with infinite ten-dernefs, attempted to Sooth my mind by drawing me into a little conver
\
He Spoke of his journey, of the time he thought it probable he fhould be abfent, of the infinite pleafure he ihouid have in once more returning to his native country, and of the joy with which he flattered himSelf I fhould receive him after fuch an abfence. Hk emotion was all the time evident, tho* he made many efforts to fupprefs it* Several times as he Spoke, his fine eyes glistened; I.could not refrain my
tears; it was a moment of tenderneSs;
#
perhaps
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
17c
perhaps even you, my Julia, will blame me for being too explicit, but when he urged me on the Subject I laid open my whole heart to him, and vowed eternal unchangeable alFedion. He Spent two hours with me ; had it not been embittered by the reflection that we were So Soon to part, I fliould have Said two delightfulhoms.
At lall, as if recollecting himSelf, he ftarted from his feat, and clafpin me with fervor to hisbreaft, he exclaimed, ‘‘Farewel, beloved of my foul! Tho* you have for the preSent. baniflied me from your preSence, yet your bleft idea will be the cheating companion of my existence ; and ini; whatever realms fortune or chance . Ihali place me. Still the pleaSmg re-fleSlion that I am loved by you, will. pi-eferve me/rom deSpondence. But,,
I A
ray;;
1
WREATH OF FRIENB'SHTFv
my Selina, be caieful; for my Sake, be careful of your health; remember the life ofthy Weftbiiry is bound up in thine,; and unlefs you, my beloved girl, are in full polSellion of cafe and comfort, I can never enjoy one moment’s Satisfadtion,” He was much aifedfed as he Spoke theSe laft words, his voice faultered, and he could hardly articulate them. At the Same time, flipping a Small fhagreen cafe into my hand, he disappeared in an inflant.
You, my friend, will judge of my fituation., I fat Some minutes moti-onlefs. Scarcely confcious of my exift-cnce y at laft I exclaimed, ‘‘ Is he reallygone?” The exertion I made to Speak was the means of relieving me, by producing a violent Ihower of tears, which I believe preferved me
from
wreAth of friendship. 177
•c
from fainting. As Soon as I had per-fe6Uy recovered my recplleftion, .1 opened the caSe ; it contained a miniature pidure, a Striking reSemblance of himfelf; . ‘^‘ Alas !’* Said I, “ how Soon are all our earthly ■ comforts torn from us ? how Ihort is the time fince I enjoyed the -Society of my ■ Viteflbury; Since I daily beheld him and converSed with him; and now rnuft all my con-folation be fixed upon this piece of inanimate painting ! Yet even this will I cherilh, becaufe it bears his reSem-
,	t
blance; it’fhall be the companion of all my grief and unavailing tearsd^. I am afhamed to confefs all my weak- ~ nefs, even to you, my Julia, who view ■ all my adions with the eyes of friend-
fhip; but it is Some eaSe to my full .
%
fwoln heart, to, give it, vent oven in ; this ..manner. ■

‘i.

I -5
V erv
lyS WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Very fortunately forme, Lcrd and Lady St. Clair did not return, till late. Your dear mother fuITers too feelingly for the diftreffes of others to torment a wounded heart. She took no notice of my uneaSineSs, but related tome, with her uSqal good humour, all. the little circumftances Ihe had met
with in her morning’s excurSion. She
#
afterwards talked to me of your return,, of the pleaSure two ftich friends muff have ill meeting, even after fo fliort am abSence, of Several little Schemes and; plans Ihe had formed for our amufe-. ment. This fubjecl; was infinitely too, tenderwhilft Ihe Spoke on indifferent;, things, I could give her an anfwei', but, now I found it, impoffible to Speak; I could not.help accufing my-felf of in gratitude for not entering with, more chearfulneSs into the Schemes.
«
Lady St., Clair’s goodnefs had formed


to
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP, ly^^
to diffipate my melancholy. Tho’ I looked forward with infinite joy to the time of your return, yet parties ' and excursions, without' Wellbury, . were So little to my fatisfadion,. that: my heart lickened at-theidea of them. . In Ihort, there w^as a void in my own ■ bread:, and I Fancied -it* was in the. whole creation.* I inuft once again repeat the wilh, that I poffelfed a little: of your, fortitude,, my friend. »
How often have I feen you converSe " with fmiles to Lord and Lady St. Clair> ^ when Ihavdknown your heart to be ' lorn with'anguilh’? It is certainly a i duty we owe our friends,^and fociety, . to conceal.in fome degree our feelings, when they give pain ;to thoSe about
us; but you mull, my Julian: pity and^' forgive the weaknefs of your:
Selina-C'iuriney. ■
L.E T-T E-R -
/
iSo WREATH OP FRfENDSHITrf
LETTER
Lltl.
»	V. »
Lord Wejihury, to.the Rev. Edward.
Seymour* ,
Drummond-PJace^ July 14.
rf->HAT I have not written to you
before this time, my dear Sir, has not been owing to a want of re-fped, or a proper fenfo of that friend’* Ihip you extend to me, but to the ,un-pleafant date of my own mind ; of which indeed my laft letter would aL ford you but too true a fpecimen.
'C
In addreffing myfelf to you, I feel aflramed of the petulance and repining, fo visible in that epiftle; and
would
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP l8l
■would willingly^ atone for indiScre* tions So apparent; but if I were to ex^ cufe mySelf by faying my paffions had at that moment got the dominion, the apology would certainly in your eycs^ agravate the offence; tho^'perhaps it was at that moment the' only one I ' could make. Nothing is So fatal to us -as too great a confidence in our own
s
ftrength; it is always Safer, I believe^ to diftruSb, rather than think, our-felves, too Secure; in future-1 mean to conquer only by flanding on the defensive, for love is too powerful an. enemy to be oppofed in fingle combat
9
when our auxiliary, reaSon, is laid
I wotild not have you imagine that I feel lefs affedion for Selina than I
ever did fince firfl we met; but I feel
/
it.in a different manner. It is no longer
that

iSz WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
that impetuous pahion that bore down all before it, it is now calm and tranquil ; her Superior reaSon and conduct have restored me to my SenSes ; and tho’ I Still live only to love her, it is Such a Sentiment as prefers her hap-pineSs and repoSe to every felfilh con-lideration. In one circumstance, have I differed from her in opinion, but inclined to it myfelf, and authorized by your Superior judgment, I have refilled even her tears; but I do it as the thing moSt likely to expedite our hap-pinefs, and the moSl probable means of inclining my father to confent to it.: . In consequence of this reSolution 1 have parted from all I hold dearefl in the world, my father, and my Selina. When we Ihall meet again, heaven knows 1 were I inclined to judge of ray own agitation at this event with any fp^k ct fuperflitionj I Ihouldfear
i
our

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 1S5.
4
our Separation would be long and;, melancholy.
Had Lord Mordington given me the I'eaft hint of his disapprobation of this Step, r would have remained with him at all events; but he made not the. lead objedion, nor ever alked me how near, or how diftant was my re- -turn ; I can truly Say it, is in his pow--er to make m.y abSence long or Ihort. I Suffer So miiGli from his -diSpleafure, that I would give up> every point hut one tO'banilh it; alas, that one is all he inSifts on 1 But a^ truce to complaint; fhould I continue this drain, I fhall relapSe again, and be the very charader I wilh to avoid, and which I am Sure you could not
efleem^.
Qn. i.



<•

184 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
On my arrival here, I found poor Drummond in Sad Spirits, nor do I think his health yet well eflablilhed. Indeed the mind and body are So cloSely united, that when the one is ill at eafe, the other cannot be well. He has yet had no anSwer to his letter, and is • in the moil diSagreeable
*
fuSpenSe.
Mis excellent mother, whb watches every turn of his expreffive countenance, pines in Secret, and feems to dread the approach of every poft,
which Ihe experts will bring the death
✓
warrant of her Son’s happineSs.; juftly fuppofing, that an offer of Such a hand, and Such a fortune will not be refufed. I own I wilh to know his fate before I leave England, but I cannot 'Wak much longer Should the winds prove fair. 1 havc,,j, taken my paffage to
3paini;

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
I
■if
I
Spain'; which tour, I prefer at preSent^ as capable of affording me more variety than
or Italy, both of which I am well acquainted with. Wherever I go I hope for a continuance of your friendihip, a conSolation I much need. By this time I fancy you ought to receive my congratulations on your union. Believe me, no one can be more fincere in offering you every good wifh on that occafioni to Mrs. Seymour, ( as the friend of my Selina, and the objedt of your attachment ) I beg my moil refpedful re-^-membrances.
When it will not interrupt your happineSs, I could wifh you would fometimes cafl a thought on your Avandering friend, who is at all times ind in all feafons, your mofl devoted
LETTER
e86.’ wreath-0? FRIENHSiriE’i
LETTER LIV.
Julia Har&ourti to Mifs Courtne%
Wansford.Houpy July lb,
N Saturday, my dear Selina, l hope to enjoy the Society of my belt friends in the Sweet Ihades of Li-vingfton. And tho’ I always part with my Eliza with the mod heartfelt re« gret, yet upon this occafion I feel Satisfied that I am returning home. I think lately you have wanted the Sooth’^ ing endearments of a friend that loves you as I do. I am certain my mother would do all in her power to amuSc you, yet to me perhaps you will lay open your whole heart with more un-
confidence than you poS-
fibly

.WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 187
fibly can to her. We will talk over again thoSe Scenes wliich for Some time-
4
paft have contributed So largely to your happineSs; and look forward, with an eye of hope and confidence, to many future years of felicity. We. will wander in thoSe groves where Weftbury uSed to be our conftant companion. But I already fancy I fee the chryftal tear ftarting in, your eye; and will not lead your imagination to dwell upon Scenes which are. not proper for you even to think of, till I am with you, to check you, when you give too much way to Sorrow.
But let us talk of our proceedings here. We have had none of that unmeaning form which is in general the conflant attendant on; a wedding;. We were at church on Sunday, but
did
I
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIF
‘ T
did not, according to the
modem;
phraSe, appear there, to the great
hindrance of all our country neigh-
bour’s devotion. We went in un-
dreSs, and Mr. Seymour alhfted as
uSual in the Service; where I cannot
help Saying, he appears to great ad
vantage ; but he indeed performs
every thing well he undertakes. He
is an exemplary young man ; the more

I know of him the higher his charac*
ter riSes in my eftimation.
We Spent the afternoon as the' fa*
mily of the red or ought to do; in con-
verfing on Serious fubjeds. Lord
Malbourne is well qualified to hold
his fhare in fuch dialogues; he is Sen-
sible and agreeable, but in my mind
he wants that Spirit and animation,
which makes his friend Drummond
So pleafing. I believe Eliza gives the
pre
WREATH OF FRI ENDSHIP. 1S9
prrcference to Malbourne; you know ihe alwavs thought Drummond too lively. I don’t think Mr. Seymour quite of her opinion in that point, as it is eaSy to perceive that he is very partial to Drummond ; but they will neither of them fpeak their lentiments before me.
I have been much embarralTed with Lord Malbourne’s particular attention to me. I ftill Hatter my Self his only intention is to Shew thofe little gallantries which our being inmates in the Same houSe naturally leads him to; and that when I am gone, he will think no more of me ; at leaft I lin-cerely hope, that is the cafe, as I would not on any account receive an offer at preSent which my father might think eligible, as my rejection of him, which would indiSputably be
the
s
190
wreath OF FRIENDSHIP
die caSe, might lead him to harbour SuSpicions which would diftreSs me heyond exprehion.
As the neighbourhood is too Small to admit of receiving vifits in form, they all dined with us yefterday ; and -this evening we are to Spend at Mr. Hargrave’s. You may expeD me to Import a great many of the young lady’s fine airs; if 1 do mot, I Shall ac-^ufe mySelf of being a very dull fcho-lar, for She is not at all fparing of her
I^fTons. She has got the moft unac-
countable rage for the country upon her juft now, that can be, and 1 verily believe her whole pleafure confifts in
the thoughts of tellin
her 'friends in

town,what immenfe felicity fhe enjoyed at Wansford. We have fiequently called upon'her to walk, I preferred it to a tete a tele with Malbourne,
when
WREATH OF FRIENTSHIF
I9I
'•when our friends could not be of the party; and I fancy by that meai^ have got exceedingly into her good •graces; for it is not an unuSual thing for her to be entirely of Lady Julid.s '■opinion, when I have fca rcely fpoken npon the fubjefl-.
You niuSt not expe£l; me till late in the evening, as our good friends here propoSe fetting me half way,, and we

dinher
■cannot imagine, my clear Selina, what joy the thoughts of beholding you, gives tothe heart of jour
.Julia IIarepuft*
LETTER

10^
wreath OF FRIENDSHIP*
LETTER LV.
Mrs. Scudamore, to MiSs Darnley-
July 2.
My Dear Friend,
Y a pacquet we have had the good fortune to meet with at St. Helena, and which will be at home in all probability long before us, I fend you Orixana’s narrative. I have fcrawled it during our paflage, which • has been fo far favourable, and quick; and I am become quite a failor, and hardly feel any inconvenience from my. change of lituation. But I have no time for dwelling on my own affairs, and muft refer you for entertainment to the following Sheets,
which

N
V/REATH of FRiEiTDSHiF. 193
\vhich contain, as near as I can recoiled, the Subftance, and the words of my friend’s melancholy fate.
Orixana and mySelf were fitting at work one morning in my apartment, when looking up from Something f. had been very intent upon, and which, for Some time had prevented my fpeaking, I Saw with concern that lier
eyes were flowing with tears
her
work had fallen from her hand, and afilidion Seemed to have taken fok
And
can
poITeflion of every feeling* what my dear friend,” Said I,
at this moment have occafioned this burft of grief? what has diScompoSed you ? tell me, that I may have it in my power to atone for the uneafineSs which !, or any in this houSe may have been the innocent cauSe of? Tell me, I beg of you, that I may once more be
Vol. IL
->ie
194 WREATH OF FRIENDSHI?.
able to offer Some alleviation to your | Sufferings, of which indeed I am ig* norant, but by their effe6l.’^
In a few minutes Ihe was again compofed; and taking my hand, and killing it affectionately, faid, “No, Madam, cannot do any thing that is contrary to the happinefs of a human creature; it was recollection, cruel recollection, that caufed thoSe involuntary tears! I was Ihedding them for the misfortunes which
t
clouded the day of my birth, of which this is the anniverfary. To you, my benefaCtrefs and my friend, I ought to have no concealments. Your Sympathizing heart will pity the wretch your reafon may Sometimes condemn, but whoSe pc’.haps have almolt balanced her faults. In vain you try to lead me to
hap-
fufferings may
wiEATH OF Friendship. i9j
1 happineSs; that has been long buried in the grave of my huS-band and my child, who are now numbered with the dead, and forgot, no doubt, by every heart but mine; there they will live whilft memory remains. Sometimes I fancy that nty Charles may flill be adling the part
of iTiy guardian, and in the form of
•	t
thoSe angelic beings he ever emulated, hasconduded me to your friehdfliipi ’tis the firft cordial I have tailed for fourteen yearsj but much farther I look back ere I commence my hiltory
>>
<C
Alas, Madam, it is unwar
ds of
forty years Since the Sun in all its Splendor roSe on my parents; • it Saw them blelSed in tranquility, in mutual love, and domeftic happineSs ; it beheld my father, the prince and governor of a province, rich in every
K 2

/
1^6 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
thing that could add power or grandeur to himSelf, and plenty to his fub-jeDs. On my mother, nature had Showered her choiceft gifts; born of the race deScended from the immortal Tamerlane, She poffelTed in the high-eft degree, thoSe charms of complexion for which he was efteemed. She was fair as the daughters of Europe ; tall, and exquifitely formed as the cedars of the foreft ; majefty was in her mein, but Oie commanded only by the affedtion. Thus fituated, they wanted nothing to complete their meaSure of felicity, but Some happy pledges of their love ; they waited for this event with anxious exnedtations.
i
Thus did their Sun rife, but how did it Set? That wealth, thoSe treaSures that he prized, w'ere to him the occasion of all his misfortunes.’’
‘ ‘ One
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP I97
“ One of thoSe rapacious Britons, whoSe trade it is to deftroy, had long viewed with an envious eye, that gold he could by no juft means poffeSs; and that peaceable diSpolition he had failed to imitate. He at laft threw aSide all caution, and Summoned my father to attend a tribunal he had inScituted, and anSwer for SuppoSed crimes, which
Seized by ilratagem, hurried away from his province, his home, and his happineSs, he was conveyed to Calcutta, and left in the depth of a dungeon, there to bemoan his miSery, and gueSs at the caiiSe which had laid him So krw.”
he himSelf had forged.
f
“ This ftep was taken with Such precipitation, that my mother was not made acquainted with it till Some hours after. Sequeftered in the foli* tude of the Zanana, fuSpicion had not
K
even
/
I9S WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
even whiSpered the event. Her friends at laft found it impoffible longer to conceal the tidings, which they were afraid might in her lituation, perhaps, have dreadful conSequences. Made acquainted with the fate of her huf-band, her mind at once Suggefted all there was to fear ; and Ihe determined
to hazard every thing that defpairing
%
love could infpire, or fortitude at-
tempt.
if
She waited not till morning to put her defigns in execution. She jiScended her palanquin, and fet out on this forlorn enterprife, attended by numerous friends, and crowds of Slaves; all willing to die in the caufe, could their lives pay the price of their mafter^s fanSom.”
4(
She


WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP* I99
t
She arrived, wearied and almofi: diftraded by her impatience, and her fears, an hour before my father was to be carried before	jridge, whoSe
eyes were blinded by, gold, whoSe heart was impenetrable, and whoSe hands had been embrued in the blood of thoiiSands. Before this rapacious inhuman governor did the mild and beneficent Rajah appear, cloathed in all the purity of innocence

^H’he charges were exhibited againfl him; proofs brought by men as corrupt as the judge; and the unfortunate Raj ah not fuffered to plead his own caufe, nor contradid one article aliedged againft him. In vain his friends offered treaSure after treafure; ftill in hopes to extrad more, all they offered was too little to fatisfy the rapacious delires of his unjuft perfecutor. All the wealth'
K 4
of
J
200 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
of the province was laid at his feet; it was all inadequate; but if he could by any means, add another lack to what was in his power, his fentence might be mitigated. At this moment, my mother, who on my father’s leav-ing the dungeon, fainted in the arms
of her attendants, appeared in court; die implored, She entreated. She knelt and wept;. and in all the agony of
grief, begg’d only if one was to be a
victim, file herfelf might fulfer. Alas, the very means Ihe took to five him, aimed the Sabre at his head.’*
Her beauty, heightened by her tears, became an objc6l of admiration, and added one more paffion to the bread of her perfecutor ! In vain now was the offer of additional bribes; his crimes were blackened, not to be expiated by gold or diamonds; he was
ordered

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 20t
ordered to immediate execution ; and not even a pairing embrace allowed this SaithSul pair. Naj?’, the Sentence was executed before the e}’’es of my dif-traded mother! How often has She
painted to me the horrors of that day,
♦
fearful that my young heart fhould not feel with her own enthufiafm,.the deteflation dtie.to fuch a tyranti”"'
She was hurried away from a light' fo terrible, to thehouSe of the moniler, who SuppoSed it pollible flie might in time forget her wrongs, and liflen .to his detefted pafli'on. No Sooner arrived there, than the pangs of' labour were added to her other fufferings. I came into the world at this inauSpicious mo* ment, when no parent’s fmile beamed' upon me, as an earneft of future joy;, and mifery and Woe received me to arms. How conftantly Save'
K

they/
J
102 WREATH OF FRIENOSHI?.
they lince guarded my footfteps, and
deSended every avenue where tran-
r
quility was inclined to enter ! But I
lived unhurt by the bitter milk I drew,
and bathed in the SorrowSul tears of a
mother who dragged on life only for

my Sake. Ah ! had we then died to-
gether, of how much anguilla Ihould I
have been Spared the recital

A Silent calm occupied the apart-
ment of my mother, and Seemed to
take poffeifion of every thing but her
perturbed boSom. One faithful Have
ofall that attended her journey, was
Suffered to remain. From her She
learnt, that the province, of which my
father had been governor, had riSen to
revenge his murder ; and had brought
fire and Sword to the gates of Calcutta;
that the General had been obliged to.
deSeit his new acquired treaSures, and
was
' -V
I'
■Vt



W 4; .V
; • ' ' \
i	v-N N


\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
ICA
was gone at the head of his troop s to quell this infurre6lion. This was the reaSon of his never having been Seen by my mother lince that fatal moment. How much did Ihe rejoice at this intelligence ! what bleflings did (lie not call down on thoSe brave avengers, and imprecations on the heads of their enemies.^’
‘‘ It was fome months before the conquerer returned ; but he came crowned with vidory, laden witli. wealth, inSolent with fucceSs, proud with profperity.’’^
The treafure he had left behind was not forgotten, but love was not his predominent paffion, it yielded to^
i
ambition. The day after his return he Sent to acquaint his priSoner that he Iliouldwait upon her, and hoped Ihe
would
%
\
a04 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
hearing ?’*
would give him a patient “ Tell him, Said Ihe, I am his Have, I once bore a nobler title V’ He came; at that inftant, as if by inftind, I Ihrieked, and hid my face on the bo-fom of my parent, as if unable to bear the fight of my father’s murderer. Often did file afterwards repeat to me all theSe circumllances, and thanked the power that inSpired my heart with a horror So juft. He was going to Speak, when holding me in her arms She Said, ^‘Here Sir, behold a part of that being you purSued with Such unrelenting rigour. I have preServed her, that by your kindneSs Ihe might be joined to her father, in thoSe realms of happineSs where he is now tailing everlafting pleaSures; removed from the avarice of the Europeans, he is now twilling garlands of never-fading
xoSes to adorn his beauteous daughter.

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 205
There he poirdfes gold of which you cannot deSpoil him, and diamonds, more bright than thoSe of Golconda; finish a work then So nobly begun, Satiate your eyes with blood, your heart with anguish, but know, your triumph is Slill incomplete,foryou have no power over the mind; that riSes above the
i
mandate of the judge, or the ftrok^ of the fabre.’^
‘^He was impatient to reply, and to>, put an end to reproaches So defervedc and words So penetrating; and in the moft humble, moft obfe'quious manner told her, he acknowledged all his faults, and came to implore her ior-giveneSs ; and if polfible to beg an in-
t
tereSt in her heart,which had the power to command his, and every thing that belonged to him. That he would return to her all her treafure, if She/
would

f
2o6 wreath of friendship.
would but allow him Sometimes to convince her of the ftrength of his attachment, and to prove to her how violent was his paffion which alone was the cauSe of her hulband^s death, as he could not exift while he had a rival in her alFedions.’^
How ftrange an argument, and how weak to fuppofe it could have any weight !’*
‘‘ Doll thou know, infamous ufurper, to whom thou talked: ? ( replied my enraged mother ) doll thou know, mean as thou art, that the blood of the great Tamerlane flows in my veins; that I am the daughter and wi-dow of a prince; and doll thou think I can Stoop to thee P thou, whofe hands are not yet wafhed from the blood of my huSband ! but know, weak man,
that

?N\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
207

that thy love or hate, are alike indifferent to me! that Orixana knows how
«
to free herfelf from the hands of a tyrant At thefe words Ihe drew from her lide a dagger, which Ihe had concealed there, and was going to plunge it in her bread:; when the monSter, aware of her intentions, feized it at that moment, and wrenched it from her hand, and turning from her with a Stern and angry look. Said, “ for the future I Shall know how to treat you,” and immediately withdrew.”
‘‘All hopes of efcaping from her prifon were now at an end. The governor, exaSperated with her behaviour, deprived her of every indul-
; hoping, that what he could not obtain from love, he might extort from fear. No longer was her own faithful Slave permitted to attend her;
gence
new
}

. /
Si
2o8 wre'ath of friendship.
new guards were Set over her, and (lie was threatened with the loSs oS me, if file Should remain unpropitious to her maker’s will. Sometimes he came to vifither, to See if die relented, but no change appeared; he would attempt to Soothe and entertain me ; but able
now to underhand the injury he had
«
done me, all his blandilhments were vain! Thus did four long years roll over, under the roof of one, whoSe pride and revenge only could be gratified by fuch captives; Seldom leaving our apartment, my ideas did not expand, and the. language I Spoke was confined to a Small comoaSs. The
X
beauties of nature I knew nothing of; and the walls of our priSon bounded my knowledge and my acquire-
ments.



\
MU
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
20®
“ One night, when fleep, our only comfort, had laid his leaden hand on our fenSes, we were difturbed with an unuSual noiSe and buftle, which, ac-cuftomed as we were to fear, was very alarming. Our door was Suddenly unlocked, but no one came; and again all was ftiil and Silent. After a little pauSe, our own faithful Have appeared, haften. Said She, this moment away; his the only inftant in which you can recover your liberty. The governor is Superceded, and another is arrived, and he is now attending the council; all in this houSe is confufion and diS-may ; but do not you delay a moment to free yourfelf from a piifon ; they are all alike tyrants, and not to
tJ
be trufied.’*

V
We aroSe; die led us by the hand thro’ a long range of Splendid
apartments

{r •
1^.
£lO WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
apartments, and thro’ crowds in The
Streets we palfed iinobServcd, being in
the habit of dependents; for after my
mother’s firfl; interview with the go-
vernor all pomp, or even convenience
of dreSs, was‘denied us. The Sun juft
rifing above the horizon, caufed, to
eyes So long deprived of his Splendor,
a painful fenfation ; our feet nnuSed
to exerciSe, Seemed unwilling to affift
us in our liight; and our guide was
obliged to carry me in her arms; who.
terrified at fights So new to me, had
neither Strength nor courage to pro-
ceed. At laft we found ourSelves out
of the town. Wearied with the exer-
tion, my mother beg’d only to fit down
upon the burning ground, but her at
tendant allowed her not to reft till we
arrived at the houfe of a Hindoo,
where the Banians take up their abode
when wandering from province to pro-
vince.


WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 211
I
vince. In this hoSpitable hut we were
^ •
refrelhed with fruits and water. An old Banian was fitting there, our Have Spoke to him, and afked his guidance to where my mother choSe to go. He agreed to wait her pleaSure, and when the Sun Ihould be gone down, to at-tend onr journey. It was Settled in the courSe of the day, that a village on the banks of the Ganges Iliould be our refiling place; there it was poffible we might find Some friends or relations, if haply war had left one whom We could call by thofe endearin
names.

‘^This was once the habitation of a long train of illuftrious anceftors; and Hill dear to my mother from being the place of her birth, “There, Said fiie, I can wafh this infant from the pollution Ihe has undergone from the handa

ot
X
Ic

212 WREATH OF FRIENDSHI’P
of Europeans; there I can offer ray prayers to that deity, who delighting in good works, deteSts theSe bloody tyrants; and will Soraetime revenge ray,.cauSe. There too, perhaps, he will receive from me this wretched life preServed only till my child is placed in fafety,” We Sat out weak and fainting, how llowly did we proceed ; every ftep was attended with pain and anguilh, and we had no conversation to beguile the tedious way. Tho^ every thing was new to me, I had not words to expreSs either my pleaSure, my pain, or my Surprize. Refting in the day time, and travelling in the night, it was a month ere we reached the dettined fpot; charity having Supplied our wants -all the way, for we pofTeffed nothing. We reached, it is true the deftined Spot, but ah, how changed ! ail was ruin, all was devaftation! War,
with
/
%

■WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.

with her cruel hand, had levelled the
{lately edifices, and laid wade a fruit-
ful country ; a few Scattered huts now
formed the villas;e, once fo maanifi-
o

cent, that had been the teat of my
grandfather, and of his
race, who for
ages had lived on that ground, op-
preteed by no foreign foe, and blef-
fed with domeftic peace. Nothing
remained of its former appearance, but
the fpreading tree under which the
youths were taught by fome venerable
man, the truths of their religion, the
rudiments of their language, and the
arts of peace. We approached near,
and beheld ,a man, hoary and bent
with years, inflrudling, on this very
Spot, a group of attentive little
ones.
52
How did my heart beat, and how
little did 1 know the caufe of its feel-
ings
#
V'

iI4 WRrATH OF FRIENDSHlFi
ings! My mother let go my hand | in a moment She was at the feet of the Sage, bathing them with rears, claSp-ing his knees, and in all the agony of joy calling him her father ! her dear father! It was he himfelf, that venerable man ! What were his tranfports when he beheld his daughter, his long loft daughter 1 the idol of his heart! for whom he had mourned four tedious years, reftored to hiiti again ! it was herfelf, his heart acknowledged her; thoMiis dim eyes, flowing with tears, could hardly diScern a form ftili lovely, as grief had wafted half its beauty, and deftroyed both the lilly and the rofeS^
‘^How joyfully did he lead us to his cottage, and make us the partakers of his fcantf board; for he had loft all his
ions
t.
J
WREATH OF FRIENTSHIF.
215
polfeffions in the war that robbed him of his children, and was obliged now to make his knowledge Subfervient to his Support. On me he beftowed his paternal blefling, calling me his Second Orixana! Informed of all that happened lince their firft Separation,
I
he hastened with my mother, to plunge me in the waves of the Ganges; that River whoSe waters purify the departing Soul, and the body of the polluted.^’
This accomplillied, my mother began by degrees to open her grand delign, that of burning herSelf to the memory and honour of her lamented hufband. In vain, when I was acquainted with her intentions, did I weep, pray, and intreat that Ihe would quit this Sad and fatal reSoJution ! I
represented to her that our father was
/
now
IZI'S WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
now old, that many years could not be ,expe6led to prolong his life, that then, forlorn and helpleSs I Hiould be abandoned to diStreSs and poverty ; unable from my fex, to ftruggle ■ with diiEcul-ties, impoffible to furmount them. In vain did I urge every fond argument my heart could fugged.”
cc prevent me not, Ilie Said, from fulfilling the duty T owe to the Spirit of my departed hulband, who waits for me in thofe fragrant and everladin bowers, where no longer an earthly prince, he fits commanding hods of ■fubjedts Slaughtered in his cauSe ; and whofe padime it now is, to perfecute, to torment, with never ending tortures, thofe rapacious foreigners.”
\
He Sees the purpoSe of my hearty and Smiles on thy fears. Behold then,
I
coward
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
217
coward girl! the pile already preparing, on which my wearied head Oiall reft from all its cares ! the God of our fathers will protect thy innocence. Fear not, but fee with admiration the actions and the principles of thy mo-ther; .whoSe love for thee is but a poor and fecondary confideration, when Set in competition with her fame here, and glory hereafter! Live to comfort my aged parent, and to imitate the virtues I now endeavour to illuftrateS’ My grandfather uSed every argument to dilfuade her from this enthufiaftic effort of conftancy; but the Brahmins, too much attached to their long eftablilhed, tho% in this reSpeft, inhuman principles, applauded her delign. ’^
‘ ^ The fatal day at laft arrived! I faw her walk round the pile, cele-
L	brating
Voi. II.
wreath or FRIEIIDSHI?,
Lrating the virtues of him ihe was So foon to join; I felt the parting embrace! I faw her at the appointed moment aScend without one fond regret! I Saw no more ! Infenlible to every thing but her lofs, I awaked not from my ftupor, till, borne by our friends to the houSe of my grandfather, their cruel attentions reftored me again to life,”
I heard now nothing but praifes of the courage, the magnanimity of my loft parent ! I faw not
\
the a£t in that light; I felt nothing but Sorrow: for nothing could reftore to me the blehings of her Society, or compensate the loSs of her advice. But ,
grief in young minds is not without conSolation; time wears out the deep traces of afflidion, and youth is never
the nurSe of woe.”
((
From
V,.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
219
From this time four Succeeding years were pafb in a Hate of tranquility that Scarcely marked their courSe. My grandfather continued his occupation of inftrudtion'; and I, careleSs and happy, danced with the village girls, and Sung away the Sultry hours under the Shade of Some Spreading tree. But felicity and content are fhort lived. ^ War again raiSed her horrid creSl; and fury and deftrud ion Spread terror and
r
diSmay over every heart. My only-parent, worn down with age, funk to the earthhelpleSs and enervated, and expired in my arms juft as the enemy entered the town. Unmoved by the fliouts of the Soldiers, or the cries of the people, I hung over his cold and venerable corSe, inSenSible to every thing but the miSery of the moment; and Was only rouSed by a feapoy, who dragged me from the body, and pre-
L 2
fented


220 . WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
fented me to his commanding officer; whojinformed of the fituation in which I had been found, permitted me to fee the laft duty paid to my grandfather ; his body plunged in the Ganges, and
his foul freed from all its incum-
%
brances. I was then fent to his tent, and treated with all the reSpedt I could defire, and much more than' I expected. Yes ! this acknowledgement is due from my ungrateful heart to one who afterwards ufed me fo cruelly.’’
The conqueft and the plunder of this devoted province at an end, I moved with the army, and in time was brought to Madras. There I v/as consigned to the wife of the of-
She,
kind and benevolent, took me under her own care ; had me baptized, in-ftrufled me in the truths of her
ficer, whofc -captive I was
re--
WREATHOF FRIENDSHIP. 221
religion, and took every means to promote my liappineSs. How Sweetly
did thoSe days glid
away
r! Remem-
brance would gladly reft on them, and look neither on the part nor on the future. How tranquil was my heart! how gay and how chearful! with w’hat avidity did I receive the inftruccions of my patroneSs I how did I glory in learning all her accomplifhm.ents; in imitating her manners, in catching her very thoughts and looks.’*

‘‘ This is thereaSon, Madam, I am become So like an Englifti woman, a remark you have often made. Hoyv proud fliould I once have been of a compliment So flattering to my wifhesl. and what pleaSure did I feel when my friend commended my affiduity, and was pleaSed with my attention. Often did die affure me her Son and my Self


L 3
were

222 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIF.
were equal in her heart. Her hufband too, whoSe nature was rough and Severe, put off that character in his behaviour to me, and I forgot that he was an enemy and a conqueror. But, the religion I had been taught lince I had been his property, Softened that hati jd which the principles of my mother had imprinted; and tho’ I Saw how little it in general influenced the a<5lions of its votaries, I only lamented their weakneSs in not making themoft perfect of all examples their line of Condu6l. My own errors afterwards proved to me what dangerous enemies are our paflions; and how eaSy it is to preach,, how d\Ki.cx\\tto prafliceV
“I had paflTed five years in this State of tranquility, when the Son of my benefactors arrived. He had been a writer in the company’s Service at
Bombay,
4
4/
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 225
Bombay, and was removed to Madras to the no Small delight of his fond parents. I joined lincerely in the joy this event occafioned, and met him with all the ardor of youth infpired by gratitude, and the deSire to prove mySelf worthy the (hare I poflefled in his mother’s heart. Candid, generous, open,.
lincere! Envy harboured not iO hi

breaft; nor any of thofe vices which too frequently debafe the moft beauteous forms. He was every thing a father could delire his Son Ihould be; every thing the fondeft, the moil partial mother’s imagination could paint. Manly graces, gentle virtues, were in him So happily blended, that if you will allow me an hyperbolical expreffion.
Nature feeme d in his formation to
$
have exhausted all her treafure, and left nothing for Art to add to. Such was Charles Wentworth! Strange was
L 4
the
y
224 wreath'of friendship.
effect 1 felt from, his prefence; no longer lively, giddy, and impetuous, in a moment I became timid. Silent and fearful. I raiSed not my eyes to his; I did nothing but liften to his conversation. My friend, engroffed by her own feelings, obServed not mine; and I recovered my \yonted manners ere She discovered I had ever altered them.^*

Thus bleffed in the Society of all my foul held dear, months and days palled over, and the lapfe of time was never noticed. Unnoticed too, was the State of my heart, till Charles Wentworth began to beg alhare in it. Alas! it had been his from the firll moment of our meeting. Artlefs and ingenuous I endeavoured not to conceal from him my Sentiments; but I felt & conScioufnefs that to his parents I
could
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
225
CO aid not reveal the Same Secret; and I found his fears on that fubjedt ac-corded with my own. If we continued our attachment, it w^as necelfary to deviSe fome plan to deceive them, and love is never flow. I had learnt from the precepts of my benefadrefs, the infamy, attending the indulgence of lawleSs paS-fion ; and I listened, to my lover on no terms but thofe of marriage. Charles faw the Strength of my refolution, and re-fpeded it too much to wiSh to violate it. I agreed to be his, when I could be So without difcovery. The fin of ingra--titude I did not then fo Serioufly con-fider; neither did I properly refiecly that by accepting the hand of my lover, I w^as infnnging-a facred right.
3?
He contrived to get llimfelf ordered to the fettlement at Cuddalore;, His fatheiy he well knew, could not
L S
q1
■ )ied'
226 WREATH OF FRIENDSHI?
object to it, becauSe it was leSs expeii-five living there; and the opportunity of trading was equal. UnSuSpicious of the motive ,they agreed to the prc-poSal, and in a few days a Ship was to fail, on board of which he was to take, his palTage, andalSo mySelf, who was to follow him in the habit of a Slave. Mrs., Wentworth, in conlider-ation of advantage to her Son, and in hopes that in a Short time his fortune^ would be completed, and they might all return to Europe together, gave up her prefent comfort, for fallacious hopes in the future; and Saw him embark with a fortitude which is Seldom observed but in minds like her’s,, fraught with Sound principle, and true piety. I had apparently, taken leave of him in her prefence, and the indif-ference with which I did it, left not a doubt upon her mind, concerning our
con
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
connexion, which Sometimes I believe had a little alarmed her. That was the laft moment of my feeing that dear, that injured friend! Ah, Madam, will you not think I muft have:
been formed of adamant, that I could
/
leave forever Such a mother without one tear ? But abSorbed in one idea, I Saw, I heard, nothing but her Son ;
''	f
he was the- whole world to me ; and pofleffing his heart,. I afked for nothing more! I flew on the wings of love to the Ship; where in the arms of my lover I loft all my fears. Our voyage was Ihort, and on our landing we were immediately married.’/
Cuddalore, my dear Madam, is > the ParadiSe of India, and,’, like our flril parents, for Some time, we lived a -life of perfed happineSs;: our mutual love banilhed all reflection, and the
preSent

its
28 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP,
preSent was all we thought of. But a; letter from Mrs. Wentworth, drew
I
;afide the veil-which fo long had clouded our reafon, and brought with it; i^morle and mifery .”

4e

i
‘ * Orixana,” Ihe faid to me, what a return have you made to all my tendernefs ! you have robbed me of every comfort upon earth ! ©f the ‘ duty and alFeDion of a fon ; the love and efteemof ahulband,. who con- , tinually upbraids me as the great author of his fon^s difobedience! .Dis true I have nourilhed, a ferpent in my bofom, and it has flung me to the heart! Oh ! cruel girl! this is what you have done to me! but what “ have you not brought wponyourfelf?
the violence of paffion once fubfided,
‘ ‘ what have you left but guilt and fliame ? you have involved in your
2:uilt
N

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 22,(^
guilt alSo, one,who, till he Saw 5^011, was the pattern of every virtue! Re--fleet on the whole of your crime, and: “ then call repentance to yoiir aid ‘^afkforthe mercy of that God you: “ have fo lately known, and fo hei-nouily offended ! fly from the de-“ iufion that furrounds you ! dare to-be-once,more virtuous, and I, in-
jured as I am, will find you an a-
_ «
“ fylum, where you may expiate your “ fault, and hide a face unworthy the:; “ light of heavenC"
“ Oh, Madam! if you can figure to -yourfelf what I felt on the receipt of
this kind and cruel letter, you will
*
fpare my tongue the recithl; for words

are' inadeepuate to expreis the tenth part of what I fuffered. But I had hill one confolation left, that I was not-quite the guilty wretch the thought
mca.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
me. But the fin of ingratitude was enough to link me to the earth, and Sufficiently debated me in my own opinion. What a condition was I in, when my hulband came to Soothe me with his tenderneSs, with vows of ever-lafting love, and proSpefts of forgive-neSs and felicity. He too had a letter from his mother, acculing him of deceit and Sedudion. The latter part of the charge gave him no concern, as he was, entirely innocent. We will-write, , my love,/‘Said he, ’’ to this offended parent; we will confeSs every , thing, and when Ihe finds we are not; fo worthlefs as Ihe imagines. She will once more blefs us with her affedions; Ihe will calm the rage of my Stern father, and he alSo will relent; once more be, confident, we fliall be
52
Fortune,
V'
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
2 21 “O *•
Fortune cannot long frown on minds like our’s; for a Ilrort time perhaps our fun may be obfcured, but it, will Soon Ihine forth with redoubled, luftre, to illuminate thy virtues, and" do jufticeto my choice. Did my.’ mother think it poffible I could look, with indifference on a mind formed by herfelf ? .No, l am fare fire would her-felf have joined our hands, had we but . confided in her friendlhip ; it is not yet too late, and from her candour we have every thing to hope,”
‘‘ Thus did he pour into my bofom the conSolation it So much wanted


•r
but which it was almofl averfe to receive even from him, Confcience, that faithful monitor, once awakened, painted t'o my eyes in glowing colours,, the fault I had committed. I fawmy

mother’s grief, my father’s anger; and:
feared.

232
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP'.
feared their influence on my hiifband’s heart. The thought was full of miSery; nor could the preSence of an infant, hourly expected, add one gleam of comfort to mv diftracted mind. Like
J
its unfortunate mother it was to be received into a world of woe ! How pro* phetic were my thoughts, and how juftly have they been fulfilled V*
Our letters went, but- we had no anfwer till my daughter was near three months old* Her Sweet Smiles were unable to banifli gloomy reflections; but occupied in my duty to her, and finding Some relief from fo nev/ an employment, I was unwilling to exped what I feared would bring no peace. At lafl they arrived ; but the olive branch fb anxioufly looked for by my hufband, came broken/"
^	m
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP 23^3
N Mrs. Wentworth Sent us both her bleffing and forgiveneSs; but k was only her own Ihe could offer us. She irnplored the favour of heaven to render our union aufpicious. To her-felf She owned it was a real fatis-fadtion that we had only been guilty of difobedience; but the very circum-fiance that gave her pleafure ferved Hill more to exafperate Colonel Went--worth, who faw notin the fame light-with her, the connexion we had made. He who looked forward to an im-menfe fortune for his fon, and then a fplendid-alliance, could have forgiven any indifcretion but that of entirely, difappointing him in fo important an expeclation. This rendered it impoS-lible for her to ferve us ; and all Iho could recommend, was to wait patiently a change of fortune, and to keep, our marriage a fecret till happier times,,
She
234 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP*
She had nothing to offer us but her prayers, which Ilie Said were constantly put up for our health and happinefs, neither of which die herfelf enjoyed ; the firft was daily declining, and the; latter die had long been a dranger to* The aufterity of Mr. Wentworth’s* temper, which increaSed with added years,^ made eaSe and tranquility no> longer the inhabitants of her bofom ; but die had learnt refignation, and waited patiently to be removed ta that land where all things are for-
gotten
‘‘ where the wicked ceafe
from troubling,” where the weary are at reft..”
“ This letter, intended for our comfort, proved greatly the reverSe. The melancholy with which it was tinctured gave a Sad preSage of the event which followed. In the company of
9
each

f
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 235
each other we in vain Strove to appear chearful; there is no oblivion for guilty minds, and that one adt of difobedi-ence and deceit embittered every joy. Our little one grew, was lovely and entertaining, and we had begun the third year of our abode at Cuddalore, when a letter came begging Mr.V^ent-worth to Set out for Madras, to receive thelaSt lighs othis departing mother; who could not dole her eyes in peace without his prefence. Not a word was faid about my attending him ; with** out fuch a fandion it was a rifk we dared not run ; and he left me, pro~ mifing to return as foon as ever the laSt duties were paid to his excellent pa-
rent.
We
thought our feparation
would not be long, but what tears did it coft us ? how often, how^ fondly, did my Charles preSs to his bi eaSt his infant and it’s mother ; ah ! little did we

then
2^6
WREATH OF FRTENUSHI1®’.
then think this interview was to be our

laft! I feel mySelf great! give me a moment’s paufe. Heaven will not let me Sink undei’ the Iha-do w, when the reality had not power to deftroy me.”
Six weeks ( which appeared as long as all my former life ) were now palled over, but I heard nothing of my hufband; he fent not one line to cheer my folitude. Every Ship that arrived underwent a fcrutiny, but no tidings came. Sometimes I was in deep deSpair; again, hope revived, and I banillied my fears. One day playing with my child in the garden, and taffing dowers'in innocent fport to be caught by her little hands, I was fummoned to attend a melTenger from Madras.With trembling Steps I entered the apartment; he preSented me a
letter
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 237
letter from Mr. Wentworth ; I haftily tore it open, but Soon perceived it was the hand So dear to me. My eyes grew dim, I could not read it; I gave it to ihy attendant to read; - She caft her eyes over it, and burft into tears, I Snatched it from her hand, and found lines to this purpoSe
‘‘ Charles Wentworth returns to
<C
cc
you no more
he breaks thoSc


ignoble chains with which you have So long enflaved him, and commands you to give up to the per-“ Son who delivers you this, your daughter, the offspring of your guilty love! It will be proteided ; but as to yourfelf, no longer millreSs in the houSe you inhabit, you are the flave of the family who fuc-‘‘ ceeds Mr. Wentworth.
iC
cc
<c


Wis a
4
^ puniSliment due to your crime;
‘‘ Submit
23^ WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Submit to it therefore without murmuring; you know you are my property, and I have a right to diS-“ poSe of you ; do as you are com-manded, or tremble for the confe-

quences, as you fear

‘ ‘ Hen ry Wentworth, ’ ’
‘‘ I did tremble i but it was for my prefent fituation, for nothing worSe could follow ! I raved, I tore, I clafp-cd my child to my burning bread:; I vowed we would never be parted ! I faid her father had no hand in the cruel order that was to deprive me of her. His nature could not change, and he was once all goodnefs. I then wept
ft
and entreated the pity of the meflen-ger; he feemed humane, but could not alter the decree, or fwerve from his obedience. I requested a few hours to reconlider this fatal letter;
could
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
^39
could 1 be Sure my hufband made the demand, he Iliould he obeyed, even had he ordered me to plunge a dag-g:er in my heart ; this would have been kinder than to rob me of my girl! I would conSent to be a Have, would they but leave me that treaSure to Sweeten the toilSome day. The laft hour came ! The fliip was going to Sail, and the Servant demanded his charge! A gain I loft all patience, and Spent mySelfin unavailing lamentations. I took from my wrift a bracelet which had once been my mother’s; that and its companion were the Sole remains of all her grandeur. The claSp was a ruby Set round with diamonds, and faftened to a ftring of pearls. “If we muft part, my Sweet angel,” I Said, “wear this to remind thee of thy fond, thy wretched mother!” I bound it on her
arm.
^40 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
%
arm. InSenSible to my agony, and ignorant of the caiiSe, fine looked up at me, and Smiled at the aflion, and kiS-fed the hand that So adorned her. From that moment I was no longer* fenSible; I fell into fits, and in that interval they took from me all my comfort.’’
How Ions I remained in this Hate of infenfibility I know not. Re-ftored at lafl to my Senfes I found my-felf furrounded by ftrangers^ who feemed anxious for my recovery. With their affiStance, life and reafon once more animated a heart that would not break.- Oh! my dear Mrs. Scudamore ! when I re deft on all my fuf-ferings, I w'onderfor what a life like mine has been preServed. ’Tis now many years fince I have givem up ail
enquiries atter my hufband and my
child;
WREATH or FRIENDSHIP. £41
ft
child ; all that I made were fruitleSs, and unavailing, and I wearied othel^ without advantage to mySelfv”
“ What has been their fate, heaven knows! I have dragged on a hope^ ieSs exillence, of little uSe to others, and a burthen to itiySelf. The family to which I wasconligned treated,me with kindneSs, and I endeavoured to make all the return my Services were capable of. Years rolled over years, but they brought no alleviation to my Sorrows ; the engraving was too deep for even time to obliterate. Hope had flown far away; till becoming the Servant of Mrs. DenniSon, it once more fought for admiflion in a mind natu
•cv
I
rally inclined to be Sanguine, thought it poISible my attention, my affiduity to her, might be the means of my getting to England. It was the
Vol. II.
M
end

i^2 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
end of my wiShes; and when I heard her intention of leaving India, and that I was to attend her to Madras; I doubted not but I fliould be permitted to follow her fteps* How Severe the disappointment of this hope was, you. Madam, who received fo much trouble and anxiety from it, can bell tell; but it was the means of gaining me your friendihip ! It caufed you to in-terell yourSelf in my behalf; and I have every reafon to think that good will Spring from what I looked upon as the greateSi evil. If at the end of this long and tedious voyage I Ihould fail to hear any tidings of thofe dear relations, I truft 1 Shall ftili retain your fiendlliip ; I cannot be quite wretched while bleffed with that cordial, and the life that is left me Ihall be Spent in your Servicein proving to you, that cold as my heart
is.

WREATH OF FfUETStDSHIP-. 24^
is, it is now more capable of gratitude than in the days of my felicity ; and that the ftormsi, which have So long beat againft it with ceaSeleSs violence, have not deftroyed, but promoted that excellent virtue.”

.'j
i ‘
%
My dear Eliza, I have not time to add a Sentence more; we Ihall Soon meet, and then we will comment on this Sad tale.
I am., ever your’s,
Emily Sciidamofe,
M

I^ETTEK.


2,44 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
LETTER
LVI
Lad.^ Julia Harcourt, to, Mrs. Seymour.
Livingfion~Abbey, July 2i
OW did you get home, my dear
Eliza ? I am anxious to know,
as darkneSs had Spread his grim coun
tenance over the whole horizon long
beSore I arrived at the place of my de-
ftination; and I am Sure you would
be much later, as you had a longer
journey to take. But I hope your two
beaux preServed you from fear
and danger of every kind. We loitered
too long upon the road ; our party
was too pleaSant to think of Separating.
Without flattery, you and votre mart
have a method of making parties and
conversations paSs o
ff in
the mod
agreeable Sty le imaginable.
1
Selina
1
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP,
245
Selina is much obliged to you for. your invitation, and will certainly accept it; on condition you keep your promiSe of coming for her. Poor girl! I hope change of air, and variety of company will be of Service to her. She is pale and languid, tho’ ftill beautiful; and has acquired a'kind of melancholy tenderneSs, which, to Say truth, 1 believe fire has Scarce a udili to get the better of. I was telling her yefterday evening how much I ex-peDed from her excurfion to WanS-ford, ‘‘ and foon after your return, my father talks of going to town ; and as you have Spent fo little time there, every thing will appear fo new, fo Splendid, and fo gay, that I flatter my-felf you will be asbrifk as a young roe on the mountains,” “ How can you talk fo, Julia,” Said She, “you know there is no place in the world I love
M 3	half
«
\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP,
So much as 1 do Livingfton ; every tree, every bower, and every walk, brings Some agreeable idea to my re-mefnbrance ; and when the cold blafts
r “	*
of winter Ihall prevent our enjoying thoSe Sweet rambles we have at present, I had rather Spend my time in this room than in any other place in the univerSe. Does it not remind you of athouSand agreeable Scenes that have
in it y* I cannot Say I have any paffion for inanimate objeDs; and and as to thoSe charming Scenes you fpeak of, they have been So happily blended with the diSagreeable, that believe me, I would much radier for-
4
et thanremember them, I fancy it is much the Same with our journey thro’ life, it is So mixed with care and uneafineSs, that at the lad we would rather reSign our being, than riin the rilk of combating any more
dif-.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 24,7
i i
difficulties. But if you have an iii"
%
clination to inoreaSe your partiality (or flaceSj my dear friend, vve will, if you pleafe, walk down flairs; as I was informed when I came in here, that Lord Mordington was below; and I am very certain Spending the evening with will So attach you to the room, that I am afraid I fhall not be able to prevail upon you even to fit down here to-morrow morning.” Now, Julia, you are getting into your airs again, and what is worSe, you are breaking your word with me; did not you promiSe when you came home, you would compaflionate and Iboth me ? and I proteft I have not heard one tender expreffion fince your arrival.” ^‘Too much of foothing haft thou, poor Selina V I perceive that has been the bufineSs my mother has employed herfelf in, all this time j and
M 4
1
24^ WREATH OP FRIENDSHIP.
I do not find it has agreed So well with you, that the plan ought to be purSued further. Trull me^ my dear girl, I would rather laugh you out of your melancholy, than footh ’you to continue in it.’^ Nay, Julia, if you are determined to laugh at all events, pray Jet us go down flairs, foratpreSent I am almoft as equal to encounter Lord Mordington’s ill humour, as your mirth.*’
Down we Sallied. As Soon as his Lordihip cSpied me, he cried out, ‘^Well, Lady^ Julia, So you have been jaunting about; I hope you have been happy ! young people never think themSelves So, but w'hen they are immerSed in diflipation ; galloping about from place to place, without Spending one rational mo-

ment/' ‘‘I thank you, my Lord, I
have
I ft
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 249
have been very happy, but not very diffipated; my pleaSures have been rather of the Serious kind; I have been witnefling the Solemn union of two friends, whoSe hearts were before firmly attached ; and who will, I hope prove a pattern of conjugal felicity.,’^ If you think there is So much real happineSs to be met with in the matri-monial Hate, young lady,” faid my Lord, “ you had better have laid aSide a little of your obftinacy, and taken Lord Weftbury ; he would have made you an excellent hulband, that I will anSwer for; and then he would not have been banilhed his native country, and from the arms of an indulg-ent
o
parent, to wander, like an exile, in foreign climes.” “ I thought my Lord,” faid my father, you had rather wished Lord Weftbury to go-abroad; if it had not been your in-
>■

M
clination.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
clination I amazed you did no<4 tell him So,, and requeft him to put off his journey.’’ ‘‘ I delire him toi put off his journey !”" exclaimed Lord, Mordington, I requeji f where I have a right, to command! You know-little of my diSpoSition, my Lord, if you think I could Submit to that. But to,allow for one moment that I had-condefcended to ajk him to Stay, he-would, I make no doubt, immediately have complied with my requeft; but, then the next ftory would have been, If Iftay in England you muft make, it agreeable to me,, and allow me to marry MifsCourtney ; and fo the mat~. ter zvould have been much improved,, would it not?^^ If you have no objection to a rubber at whift this evening,, my Lord,” Said my mother, I will ring for a card table.” ‘^Aye, there it is,” Said his Lordihip, there is anon
the

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 251
ther proof of your modern refinement; a man could formerly have gone to his neighbour’s for an hour or two, and chatted in a friendly manner, but now the moment you enter you muffc be Squeezed behind a card table, or elSe nobody thanks you for your com--pany. As we are not a Set of gamblers, and have I dare fay not the leall de-lire to pick each other’s pockets, for heaven’s fake. Lady St. Clair, let us this one evening be freed from the Stupidity of whift. I want to talk to> you of my own diStrelTes, of the loSs I have of my Son, and how much I am in want of his Society. And that other foolilh fellow too, Drummond , he is,
I find, ftill determined to go to Paris,
\
and marry this French girl. Poor Lady Drummond! I dare Say She is very much diftreffed about it; yet even fihe can talk about honour, and not
breaking
2^2 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIF.
breaking engagements, and Such ridiculous fluff. If he was my fon, I would break every bone in his fkin, and let him keep his engagements then if he chofe. But I believe I Should not talk fo,. there is no faying how many ways children find of tor-tnendng their parents; Ms ten to one: but the next whim Weflbury may take, will be to marry a Spanijh lady,, and I Shall be plagued and vexed with her and her Duenna, and her Don of a father, all my, life after.*^ As my mother’s card Scheme had proved inete fe<fttial, I determined to make one more effort to Silence his Lordihip; ‘‘ I declare if you had not begun to talk of old times,, my Lord, L fhould
9
probably have fprgot to tell you how-
indefatigable I have been all this time^
*
at Wansford, tq get that old Song per-fed you ufed to be fo fond of; and if
yqUi
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
^ %J
you will give me leave, I will let you bear what improvement I have made.’^ “ Well, well,” Said he pee-villily, let us have it, I find there is no dealing with ladies, without you will let them be the principal performers in the Scene; they can no more Sit Silent, and let another perSork talk, than they can Ji^V'

I took him at his firSt word, andJ Seated mySelf at the harplichord, where I played all the old Songs I could think of, till Supper was announced. My father then took tipon himSelf the: burthen of the conversation, and by turning it upon public topics, kept him tolerably compofed, without mak-any more perfonal refledtions, till it was time for him to take his leave.


It


254
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
\
It has juft occurred tome, Eliza, that you will think this family occupies all my thoughts ; and that when the young gentlemen are abSent, I make the old one the Subje6t of my pen. I am very confcious he cannot be an agreeable one, and therefore left Ilhouldagain be tempted to mention his name, I will this inftant fubScribe myfelf your very afFedionate,
Julia HaY€oun.
LETTEH
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
25^-
LETTER
LVIF.
Etkvard Seymour, to Drummond, ESq.
Wansford-Etoufr, Luly 23'.
AM at this moment a convincing proof that in-this world we cannot enjoy perfect felicity. Tho’ I am not able to form one wifh for myfelf whicte is nbt amply gratified, and wherever I turh my eye I find fmiling peace,, and contentment, her companion, yet in the midft of this delightful fcene a figh eScapes me. Friendihip has So firm a place in my heart, that I find, iinlefs you, my Drummond, can be,: happy, I fhall but half enjoy th .t favoured lot heaven has beitowed
#
©n me..
A
25^ WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
\
I have with great impatience waited for the arrival of every poSt, in hopes of hearing from you; and I am now afraid a relapSe has been the cauSe of your Silence. I beg it as a favour you will write to me the moment you re-ceiveihis letter.

As I was writing the iaft Sentence,. Malbourne came into my Study. He begged he might not interrupt me,
he would take a book. I wrote a few
%
lines, and obServing he only turned over the leaves and did not attempt to r^ad, I laid down my pen. Seymour, if I difturb you I will leave the room.^^ “Not at all, my Lord, I am only writing a few lines , to enquire after our friend Drummond | I am at this time very anxious about him.” To tell you the truth, Seymour,
it was to have a little conversation
with
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 2^7
#
with you about Drummond, that I
came to you
You told me he had
given up all thoughts of addreffing Lady Julia, and had aflually written to MadamoiSelle de Sanzey ; that Jhe will accept him I have not the leaft doubt; do you think it would give him pain to See his friend in pofSeflion of that ineftimable treafure, Lady Julia Harcourt ? I love her paffionately,. but have avoided declaring my attachment till I had your Sentiments on the fubjeft. Since Ihe has left WanS-ford, I find her fo very neceffary to. my happineSs, that if you think I may venture to offer her my hand, without wounding the heart of my friend, I will to-morrow go to Living-flon-Abbey.’*
Your queftion, Malbourne, gives •me Some concern. That Drummond
ought
25S WREVTH OF FRIENDSHIP.
ought to b:
Julia
thoughts, bcS^'re he offers his hand to another, is a fubjecft that will not bear a debate; but which of us, my Lord, adls in every poini exadly as he Ihould do ? and therefore we muff pity, not condemn, the weakneSs of our friend. Was Drummond really married, it would give me infinite pleaSure to See you happy with Lady Julia. Pardon me, if I differ from you in opinion, but I think a friendfhip. Such as our’s has been, is intitled to Some few Sacrifices; and if I might adviSe, you would at leaffc postpone your addreffes a few
1
weeks longer; it can be no prejudice to your own affairs. Lady Julia has ^ large Share of delicacy,, and were flie fenfible of your motive for delaying
your propofals, would approve, rather
" \
than condemn it.’’	“
in the mean time tell Drummond how
I
Will
WREATH QF FRIENDSHIP.
259
I am lituated, and let him anSwer for himSelf.^’ ^‘I will, before I firiiSh my letter ; ' tho^ I confefs it is as painful a fubjedt for me to write upon, as I am afraid it is for him to read.^^
He left me, and I have given you the converfation exactly as it paffed. Malbourne was not perfedtly fatisfied with my requefting him to wait a few weeks. I Ihall expedl to hear from you oh this fubjedl; but do no violence to your own feelings ; take time to conSider before you write, and do not let a flight of generous friendfiiip lead you to ruin your own peace by a precipitate anfw^r. That happioeSs may be your conftant companion, is the-
ardent wifli of your
E. S-
letter
26o wreath of friendshif
\
LETTER LVIII.
Lord IVefibury, to Lady Julia ILauourf^
Juh2<^.
[7HILE I am waiting for the fignal to go on Ship board, I take up my pen to affure Lady Julia, how highly I efteem her condeScenSiorr in accepting me as a correspondent, in allowing me to tell her cerns, all my anxieties, think what a talk you have undertaken? but you are all humanity, and the pleaSure of being able Sometimes to administer conSolation to your friends, will, I know, amply reward you for the trouble you will experience.
my con-I grieve to
Firm in this hope, I fliall without fcruple, write what my heart dictates; without Studying to offer you entertainment, which I mySelf do not ex-
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 2,6 I
pe£l tq find, thp’ I am going a voluntary exile into Scenes .of novelty. The mind, fixed on one darling objecfl, is diSpleaSed at every thing that would for a moment banifh it; and turns from fplendor, from mirth,, and gaity, to refle6i; on that one idea which ab-forbs all the reft. If I were a philofo-pher, how readily fliould I defcribe to you the fcene which now prefents it-felf; of an ocean calm and tranquil, the ftiip dancing on the waves, a gentle breeze fluttering in her fails, the fun gilding the whole, and all nature Smiling; but my heart revolts at a re-prefentation fo different from itfelf; and recurring always to my laft interview with Selina, is all inquietude, all perturbation.
’Tis neceflary T fhould check it for a time, that I may give you a little information about my feif, and tell you
that

2.62 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIF.
<r
that I take my paffage on board the Minerva, Caprain Thomas WilSon, bound to Barcelona. At that place your letters will find me. I Iliall perhaps loiter there, on a hope (which may not be realized, bat which 1 indulge without Scruple ) oS being re-alled to my native country, Iliould my father relent, and Soften the terms of my reconciliation. You mull, in your letter, which I fhall anxioully expect, deScribe to me every look of my Selina; her emjdoyments, her amufements, nay, her very thoughts, when flie is fo good as to bellow them on me. I lliall conllantly, in imagination, be with you in that charming bower where we have fo often be-uiled the Sultry hours in ‘‘ converSe fvveet;’^ where the woodbines, no
longer (bedding Soft perfume, have given place to the mulk rofe, whofe powerful odours lengthen out the pleasures
n
/•>
V*
WRFATH OF FRIENDSHIP 263
fures of ct Jeciining year. But ere I return, ail its bloom, all its SweetneSs wiil t-w e, and the Spot only remain that was covered with So much beauty; Still it will be'dear to me as ever, for Selina has made it her abode, i muSt beg, my dear friend, that you will inform yourfeif alSo of the health of my father; I have no exDeflations of
^	Jl
hearing from him; and tho’ I have ordered his fervant to give me frequent accounts of him, I Shall not be eafy unlefs they are confirmed by you. Thus, you fee, have I, regardleSs of every thing but felf, planned out employment for your leifure hours. Tell
me how I fliall make a return for all
/
your goodneSs? I know but of one
wav, and that is, when I Shall be fo •/ ^
fortunate as to become the huSband of your friend, to make her happinefs the foie Study and bufinefs of my life; cy doing this, I am certain of contributing
^64 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
tributing largely to yoiir’s; and only
by So doing, can I deServe the efteem
;and confidence of a mind So liberal.
Drummond, whom 1 have never once
thought of Since I began this letter.
has been fitting by me all the tirhe in
real and unfeigned Sorrow for my de
* _
parture. What a Soul has that dear.
hat unfoitunate youth! and how
much do his diflreffes afSift to increaSe
mine. I told him juft now, that I
was writin
Julia
for his commands. He darted, “Gra-
cious Heavens 1 did you fay to Lady
Julia ? But, indeed, his to no purpoSe ;
I have nothing; to add !” Adieu, fair
lady, yi/y both your friends! The fhip
waits, remember my treaSure is in your
polTeffion. All happineSs attend Li-
vingfton-Abbey.	Believe me, your
mod faithful.
PFeJibury\
END or VOL. n.

U. of Pa.
Library h
Vv



/
/1 i
3
. • ^ \ ' y.
if '
-TV
A
/f i
/
c
vr^
FAAl
ri
i •>
P
r£ H-A/-VL A/ ^
--,	•-•**	-•	.»%.	■'	..s- i
^ A '	■ *.
/ ^
^ ■ i- .
s’
/


• »v
•’ . ■» '
rA
<
K
. \
/

r* y
.* V
V
/
/
' * '
’5^
• t;
o


•vv*v-r .--•-V »•
-v^‘*•'‘ ;/>>"■/
' •:- •- *-.;t: .	. .- ‘ . 'vr, :
r	■ d-'-.
. ♦ '	.:	- A: •
. — r \ •
/
%.	' y ,
x*-' r
» -	‘ N *
\ .
». * •* *: ' •
■f
\
■\

r
/ *»

\
/
>
. \
4
i

■{•T
‘ \
‘ ‘ir.
L -jk.'
.: iv;
? ..	•« . *-

I
'v
f
V ;.\
-rii'

.A-J'
^	•;	y'’	' j -.,
V. /




rv

.f ', >•.	<
.n
A V. x ■	. f
» //tv A \ J M
w w
'^r..
y

" C' • S - 'I' 'A
',	■■■■ .DV’-;C
•»	.	W'	»	-

■>
0
€
f)
0

LEVINA FOSTER.
9
9
9
9

A
THE
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER

X f
• \

/
■s.
N 1
S

/
/
T H E
WREATH
o r
friendship
O R,
\
A RETURN FROM
INDIA,
A NOVEL,
IN A SERIES OF LETTERS.
FRODESSE ET DELECTARE.
IN THREE. VOLUMES


VOL.



LONDON
PRINTED FOR
WILLIAM LANE, LEADENHALL-STREEX*
M DCC XC,
^ *
r
r
U* Ps.
U^ry
CV3CT* 5
(05
THE
W R E A T B
\
6 F
FRIENDSHIP
Letter lix.

y
f
/
i.D
V ^
vfi
D-
5::^
cr
4
Henry Drummond, ESq. to the Rev®
E. Seymour^
$
%
, ■■<- 1.
Drummond-Place. yulylq.
EYMOUR, I never ^vas better in my whole liSe ! I am in perfeA health. RoSalia has fent me a cordial,
I
prepared by herSelf and a German DoStor, which' has, with once taking, reltored me to life ! The prescription i have reaSon to think came froni the
Voh III
B
-
^ H

14"
2 WREATH OF FRIENDS HIT.
Gods, and is called by the ancients
EAeu6

IOC
Britons freedom
vine freedom! .Dis true I Hill wear my arm in a fling, but what of that ? my mind is free ! I am no longer Ihackled ■with thofe galling fetters, forged by paflion, and bound on by caprice.
Congratulate me, my dear Seymour, on my releaSe; and read die fcroll that has confirmed my liberty. Congratulate me, did I fay ? why, I fat down ■on purpoSe to congratulate you ^ and
behold I
fel
my Self. No matter, you will under-fland how it Jhould be, and that between friends will do juft as weM; for, I alTure you, if my head was not [full of my own happineSs, it would be of your’s; and that is faying things in as
civil a way, as I can fay them at pre-
fent.
V • >.
■\V R E XT H OF FRI ENDsH I f
tent, as in two days I Ihall be at the
Lady Julia
/
“ What mufic in the name! •
'*'* Which Softening me to infa:nt tender* nefs
m
** Makes my heart 'Spring like the firfl leaps of life.*'
There are heroics for you! now if J were a poet, what fine things I could, add on this Subjed:. Methinks I hear
you Say Drummond, will nothing
•	* •	.
make you wife	Yes, my dear friend-.
Lady Julia will; ^or his in her power to make me any thing. “ But hold,’* you Say again, ( for you are really very troubleSome with your queftiorrs ) will it be a proof of her wiSdom to marry thee ?” Aye, there’s the rub indeed; but why Ihould I anticipate ‘evils ? This was in happy days her

>%
B a
Own

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
own argument, and I love to abide by all her opinions. I will therefore Seek to know my fate from the mouth of my oracle alone. Once I flattered mySelf, flie entertained fome little partiality for me; and tho’ it may have been "almoft extinguilhed, yet if one fpark remains, nothing Shall be left undone on my part to rekindle it, for his in her power to give me blifs or mifery.
My father fays to me, Harry, wliat an unaccountable fellow yoii are; no Sooner out of one fcrape, than you are running poft hafte into' another, and will not allow one moment to the enjoyment of your liberty.” I acknowledge this trait is exadtly true, but his my diSpoSition, and 1 now follow its impulfe without fear.
I
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
5
I look back on the dangers I have eScaped, like an affrighted mariner on the rocks which' have wrecked his veflel; I cannot believe that my SenSes were in their proper (late, or that l. faw at Paris with the Same eyes that I iiav-:
uSed in England.
.Oi
All the eXcuSe I can- offer from my--felf to myfelf is, that RoSalia’s youth
and innocence were the charms that
\
attached me to her. How Soon is the latter worn off by the commerce of the world; and of how flight a texture were her principles, if So eaSily warped. To her female friends and Captain Hermandorf, 1 have everlaftino;
^	o
obligations ; nor am I without fome flight degree .of gratitude to her im~ charitable confeffor, but am very happy we are to Be no better acquainted.
B 3	How-
■\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
How perverSe was fortune,, time; would not Send me this news before poorM^e.ftbury left us, who, qceupied So much with his own diftreSs, had ftill a ligh left for me, for he poffeiTes universal philanthrdpy ; and tho’ unhappy now, will, I truft foon meet with the reward of his merit. I Ihall foon fee my Sagacious lincle, who, rather than, have his Son united to a woman of dubious birth (tho’ of extraordinary accomplilhments ) lets him Spend his youth in a forei gn country,, when it might be of Such elfential Service to his own. I Ihall try to argue the point with him, as Wellbury will not be preSent to be hurt by our wrangling; but I am not Sanguine, and expeft no fucceSs, therefore cannot meet with a diSappointment.
It
\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
/
It is poflible, my dear friend, you may behold me Soon at Wansford. yoiir invitation is l*ery tempting ; and
as I think you may by this time be re-
✓
ftored to your natural Senfes, and tolerably converSable upon other Subjecls befides love and marriage, ( which by the by are fubjeds at preSent very near my heart) I Shall come and partake of your ■ hoSpitality, and criticiSe your manners and behaviour in your new dignity; your deScription of which 1 am eager to imitate.
A
I hope you will have no objedion to fay a thoufand kind things for me to your Eliza. ’Tis certainly lefs dan-erous than if I Said them my Self, which, when 1 have the pleafure of feeing her, I certainly Shall do, aye,
even before your Reverence’s fate ; fo
%
incorrigible am I. Tell her I crave.
B 2
as
WREATH OF FRIENTSHr?
as a proof of her friendlhip for me^ her interell with Lady Julia; to you I
fay only I remain ever your’s.
H, D
trmtrs'i:
LETTER LX.
'MademoifeUe de Sanzey, to Henry
Drunmondf ESq.
Pans, July 2o»
Y good friend, Monfieur Drummond, RoSalia Sits down
f
to tell vou we have both been de-eeived; we have taken a phantom for a reality, and have been very near Suffering a falfe notion of honour to rob
us
WREATHOF FRIENDSHIP. 9
US of all our future happineSs. How fortunate it is that we are now reftored to our fenSes. I will inform you ex-aclly and candidly how my recovery was efSe6led. You had not left Paris many weeks before I began to examine my heart; Surprized at my own gaity I did not know how it happened that in your abSence I Should be So chearful. So unconcerned. So ready .to be pleaSed, and So delirous to give pleaSure. TheSe I found were not the fymptoms of love, as MadamoiSelle Ormond, one of our nuns deScribed them, nor what I mySelf had imagined.. MadamoiSelle told me, thoSe who truely love, are filled with doubts, fears, anxieties, and a train of gloomy
V
ideas, that, eSpecially in the. ablence of the beloved objeft, give every thing a dark and lifeleSs tinge. She is certainly a caSuift, and knows theSe
B J
matters,
iO'
WR E A'T'H ’ QP F R I E N 0SHI P

matters better than I d';. I find I have’
V '
deceived mySelfj and am going to deceive. Monfievr Drummond; I will-
write to him, tell him my doubts, and
__ !
alk his opinion.” This I fliould cerr -tainly have done directly, but I recoL
lecfted I had better wait a litti
•
I was
only young- and inexperienced, and might perhaps be too hafty ; I could ' at any rate be fincere when,you called tjpon.me for a performance of our en-. gagement; and as yet the world and its cufloms were new to me, and it might not be in my nature to -feel a-^ higher degree of alfeflion for any one -
The young Abbe D. vifited lis. often ; I found he was a philoSopher, and determined to confult him. I was ; convinced by his arguments that I had no real love,for, you ,• but he wanted , alSo to convince me, that I was not incapable of loving,^ bu£,,had miftaken:
& elfe.
.1
t jae -
*■	t
\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
II
dieobjed; and that my indifference in regard to me, proceeded from my ■penchant for another, which other he affured me was he himfelf! But I felt not the lead: inclination. to agree with him; and finding my teacher grown interefted, I could no longer expect
i
impartiality of reafoning. J flew from him to carefs my lap dog; Fidele, ( I affured him) alone.kept poffeliion of my heart. My female friends who were acquainted with my perplexities, prevailed upon me to furmount the diflike ( you may remember ) I had to going into public. Juft come out of a convent I felt like a young and fool-ilh bird let out of its cage ; timorous and fearful, I enjoyed not the buftle of the world;. they laughed at my fim-plicity, and banifhed my appreheii-Eons.. I joined their gay parties, and
Soon
■f
4
12 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIF,
Soon began to relilh with enthufiaSm the pleasures Society afforded.
As I love lincerity, I will own to you, that while my time was thus occupied, my thoughts Seldom wandered to England. At the CounSeSs de Merci’s affembly, I met with a? young German officer in the Suite of the Ambaffador. His perSon had no? thing, flriking, he was not handSome,
and the favours of the Graces he had<
\
never courted; in Ihoit, Monfieur D. he was the very reverSe of you ; , for he was grave and indifferent, tho* civil to all. I took it iit my head there would be Some honour in making conquell of one who Seemed So in?
lenliblebut I was a, novice in the
/
art of attraction, and knew not how to Set about So great a work, I*
had Some little confidence, in my per-..
fon<»
r ,
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. TJy
0
fon, and my understanding, both of which the Abbe.D. laid were Superior' to molland as we perpetually met, I did not deSpair in time of making Some impreffion. I was SucceSsful; and in a monttes time led in chains this invincible hero, and triumphed over, all thp, beauties of my acquaintance..
Arrived at the Summit of my intention I meant to abandon my conqueftj ; it was no longer in my power ! I now experienced every fymptora defcribed-by MadamoiSelle Ormond, and found, that in taking pofleffion of his heart, I, had Surrendered my own.
How whimlical and capricious are our paffions, and how little are they guided ‘ by reaSon! I faid to Captain Herniandorf, ^^what am I to do about
Mr.jprummond, and my


tOv
r
4
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
to him ?” He proved to me by demonstration, that an abSent’ lover is very little better than a dead one and that as you were in one nation, and I in another, the fame, laws could not bind both ; therefore my vows were null and void, and of no further efficacy. JuSt in this interim arrived ! Monlieur Selwyn: I met him at Madame B—*s, he told me the whole.-
4
Story of the. duel, its caufe, and the-event of it; I was very forty indeed,, and lamented much that I had not., treated you withf-.more confidence, as all this might have been prevented. It was now too late ; , vain was it to -rieve about.what could not be reme--^ died, fo I' alked Monfieur Selwyn -what I had belt do? acquainting him in the firfl: place with my prefent lituation. ‘‘ Pleafe yourfelf,' Mada-mnifeUe, ’tis.the bufinefsof all rationale
creatures
> >
WR'E AT H 0-F P R I E N D-S HI P*..
cA

creatures, but Seldom in our power; therefore Seize the, happy moment.’^
an a gey
<y
tD
lit I, this is for
philofophers; every man I conrerfe \vith is fit fbr a profelTor; and I am-, glad to find, that ignorant as I am, I agree with them in theSe difficult andS
abftrufepoints. Voiir tetter arrived,.
/
and I almoftrelapfed again. You were-10 candid. So generous, and So polite,. I was almoft inclined to be your wife, .^ and to tell Hermandorf I had changed v my mind. I went to confeflion, and" the good father affured me I could not be happy either in thk world or the ^ next, with-an heretic, as he aflures me; you are ; and that once removed from ; him and my friends here, I fhould> by your arts be tempted to become one : too. You perceive, my good friendy,.
t
that ftern fortune is fet againft our union, and .we, muft not dare attempt
s©>
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP..
to alter her decrees. Next week I have fixed for our marriage. I pray that die lady who robbed me of your heart
.may be propitious to your wilhes, and Sen Si ble of your merit.
My parents, who efieem you much, more than my fpoiiSe eledt. Send you thouSands of compliments. Adieu, Monfieur, I fliall ever be your affec.-tionate friend,
Rofalia de Sanzeji
LETTER
WREATH OF FEIENDSHIF. i?
LETTER LXI

Lady Julia Harcourt, to Mrs. Seymour*.

Livingfion-Abbeyf Augujl 2.
VEN in this world of wonders you will, I make no doubt, my dear Eliza, be greatly aftonillied, wheii I tell you, that I have feen, converfed, and /pent one whole evening with Drummond. I know not how I Should attempt to convince you of the truth of my alTerti'an, when I can mySelf hardly believeits reality. While we were at tea yeftei day afternoon, the Scivant told my father there was a young gentleman in the library wifhed to fpeak with him. He immediately went,
. and Stayed I am Sure more than half an.
hour

iS WR RAT HOF FRIENDSHIF
\
hour. It is certainly a new love? for you, Julia/* Said Selina,
and
Lord St. Clair is fettling all preliminaries before he introduces him.** Quite as probable that it is for yoilr-felf, my good friend,*’ Said I, “ my father is I believe full as much import-tuned on one hand as the other ; and if, it Ihould, pray Selina don’t put the poor youth into defpair at once; you will absolutely want amufement in Weftbury’s abfence.” Immediately, as -t had finished the lafi: word, my father entered, and with him Drummond! It is impoflible, my Eliza, to give you an idea of my feelings at that mo-^ ment; fo many various fenSations tooL pofleffion of my bread;, I knew not which to attend to. Drummond looked more interefting than ever; his eyes,. Sparkled with pleaSure; and a
fine

N
V


WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
19.
fine glow of health overSpread his whole countenance.
He addrefled my mother and Selina in an eaSy genteel manner; ^^and now, ■ Lady Julia,Said he, “ I am come to offer mySelf at your feet a willing captive, earneftly requefting to be once more reinftated in all my former rights and privileges ; and believe: me, you will find me more docile, more traBahle, and more oxyour command than ever.^^ There was Something I thought So cavalier in his ftyle that it really diSconcerted me;
Eliza, whom you have often Said you never Saw at a loSs for words. Believe me at that inftant I could not make a reply; however it very fortunately occurred to me, that I mull Say fome-> thing, and that direDly; and with as
t
much compoSure as I could m- fter.


/
20
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
‘Ht is impoffible, Mr. Drummond,
I Said ‘ ^ that you Should ever be reinstated in what you call your former rights and privileges; I recoiled; when I laft Saw you, I called you mjfriendy but your departure was So abrupt, and without making one reServe in caSe of your return, that I looked upon the-place as vacant, and have Since that time bellowed it, in the moSl unre-Served confidential manner, u pon
I.ord WeStbury; and I now flatter my-Self he will hold it till all friendships Sliall be vain.” Happy WeStbury!” Said he, ‘^thou doSt indeed poSfefs a treafure that Princes might be vain of; but Surely, my dear Madam, your heart is large enough to admit of more than one friend at a time; but if your principles do not allow a plurality in friendjhip, there is a more Under title which 1 would with much
more
\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
11
more anxiety aSpire to,and which I Sincerely hope you have not likewiSe considered as vacant, and beftowed it on another.” “No, there,” Said I, “thanks to kind fortune I am perfedly Safe; nothing moie tender than friendship would 1 allow any of your treacherous fex to hope for from me. I believe you to be all alike, faithleSs in love ; and truSt me, I Should have a much more contemptible opinion .of myfelf than I have at preSent, could I fuSpectt myfelf. at any future time of being likely to deviate from my ftridt principles on that head.” Why Surely, my dear Lady Julia, ypu cannot
mean
excuSe me for interrupting you, Mr. Drummond,” Said my mo-
ther.
Julia
into one of your accuSlomed arguments, allow me to enquire by what Slrange fatality you are here at prefent,
and
2.2
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
and why, as I preSume by your con» verSation, unmarried ? I hoped long before this, I might have congratulated you on being a happy hulband.’^ I have. Lady St. Clair,’’ Said he, in a moil miraculous manner recovered my freedom; and like many other foolilh people, you See I cannot now be content with the blelling I enjoy, but wifh once more to be held in bondage by your fair daughter, and fubje<5t to all the pains and penaltieSy commonly called by the world, caprice and whfmSy which She can find in her heart to torment me with. Would you believe it. So greatly does Cupid infatuate his votaries, that the firfl uSe I made of my liberty was to convey mySelf to Livingfton-Abbey, where I was certain of being again enthralled.” “ It is at leafl a conSoiation.” Said my mother, ‘‘to refle(51:, that none of thoSe
dreadful

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
23
dreadful bondages you Speak of, will do you any harm. I do not think it is in the power of any woman, however charming, to break your heart; I believe your maxim is taken from that old Song,
** If Ihe is not kind to me.
'** What care I how fair Ihe be ?
3?
cc
My dear Lady St. Clair,

Drummond, how much do you
miftake my charadler; you know not
how often I have hid an aching heart
under-the (emblance of gaiety; nor
how much it is in the power of one
woman to rhake me feel! But my
«»
dear Lady Julia, why will you ftill preServe that frigid indifference ? it is So unlike the ufual tenor of your •condudt, that it almoft petrefies me. pity’s fake, let me once more
have
tA. WREATH OF FRIENDSHiS»
have the pleaSiire of beholding the
laughing Lady Jiiiia I left behind.

Whilft my mother and you perfill in making love the topic, I muft Hill preferve what you call my frigid in-
difference.
It is fo foreign both to
my heairt and inclination, that I cannot endure the fubjed. If you will bring your converfation to a level with the capacities of the reft of the company, we will all endeavour to bear a part
Agreed,’’ faid Drummond, and I will, in obedience to your
4
command, for- the prefent banifh /o'y^ from my vocabulary ; tho’ it has uncontrolled poffeffion of my heart.”
in It.
)> a
^‘You have been at Wansford lately, Lady Julia; you went prepared to admire my friend Seymour; I doubt not ht anfvvered all the expedations you had
formed
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.

formed of him.
<c
Indeed he did.
)>
Said I, nay'he exceeded them t h iis impollible for words to do jiiftice to the merits of Mr. Seymour, he is the beft young man I ever met with.” ‘‘Take care, Lady Julia,” faid he, “ you do not forget that Seymour, is one of the faithlefs Sex you have been Speaking of. But I beg your pardon, I will not break my agreement with you. Lord Malbourne too I believe was there at the fame time. What is your opinion of him;?” fixing his expreffive eyes full in my face ■as he Spoke. “I think him,” Said I, “ juft fuch a man as Mr. Seymour was likely to choofe for a friend.” “Upon myfvord,” Said he, “Lord Malbourne is infinitely obliged to you; after what 3^011 have faid you could not have paid him a higher compliment.” do not think this at all fair, Mr. Dnim-
Vol. III.
C
mond,”
\
d.6 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
\
-Hiond,” Said Selina, ‘‘ you Should not
%
catechize Julia So cloSely for her opinion of all your friends; their intimacy with you mull make it unpleafant for’ her to pafs her fentiments upon them.’’ “Thankyou, Selina,”faid I, “that was my idea of the cafe exadtly ; but I thought as I had objected to the firft Subject, if I refufed to anfwer the quef-tions that were alked me on the fe-cond, they might think it was impof-fible to pleaSe me.” “1 earnellly intreat forgivenefs, fair ladies,” faid Drummond, “ if I have erred, bind me to what reftridiions you think proper, 1 am willing to Submit.” “ That will never do, Drummond,” faid my fa-r, “You are too fubmiffive; exert
th
a little Spirit, or che girls w ill tyrannize So there will be no bearing them.” We then converfed in an eaiy manner, on common Subjects, ’till eleven
o’clock.
WREAtH of FllIE^DSHir.

o’clock, when the Servant came to in* form him that Lord Mordington’s pa* tience was exhaufted, and that Mr* Drummond rnull return home* ‘‘I declare,” Said he, ‘‘I had forgotten till this moment, I was the gueft of my agreeable uncle, or I don’t thiiik I durll have rilked his diSpleaSure So far as to have Staid to this time. Will you ride in the morning. Lady Julia ?’* No, Sir*” “You will walk perhaps.” “No, I Shall not be out at all*” “ I Shall probably meet with you in the muSic room.” I believe not; I Sliall be particularly engaged all the morn* ” He bowed, You will din6
mg.
with us then Mr. Drummond,” faid my father. “With pleaSure, my Lord.” He then took his leave*
Now, to me, Eli^a, all this is iilex* plicable. What he can mean by this
C 2	Vilit*
28 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
vilit, I cannot find out; and what mjr father can propoSe is ftill more ftrange. I have not yet forgotten the paffion he was in when Lord Mordingtori faid I had apartiality for Harry Drummond.
Adieu, my dear Friend, I am anxious to hear from you ; tho’ you are a matron, you mull ftill remember us poor Spinfters; among which number I verily believe you will always rank your afFedionate friend.
yulia Harcourt,
LETTER
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
20
LETTER
LXIL
Henry Drummond^ ESq. to th
Edward Seymour*
O
W
Wejihury-Lodget dugujl 3,
Flatter my Self, dear Seymour, that my laft letter would in Some degree anSwer your’s, which it pafled upon the road; as by that you would learn my intentions, and Lord Malbourne would Sind I had not given up all hopes of Succeeding with Lady Julia. I miift confeSs I do not relilli the idea of a rival in her affedlions, and now and then am So Selhili as to willi that Malbourne and Ilie had never met. As tO' himSelf he is endowed with Such a. fliare of good fenSe, that I hope his. disappointment will do him no harm;,
c 3
but

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
N
but if he is in any danger, he need only eall to his aid that philoSophy he fo much boafts of on other occafions, and which he Seems by Some rnagical arts to have purloined from moft of his friends, and added their Stock to his own.
I Sincerely wilh him happy with feme deServing woman as like Lady Julia as	but not herSelf. Imuft
now inform you that the day before yellerday I arrived at the Abbey. I did not make my appearance to the ladies till I had firft got the fandtion of
Lord St. Clair, to whom I made full
/
confeffion of the reaSons of my paft and
j
preSent conduD; and ended with requeuing his leave to offer my hand to Lady Julia, and to prefent him with a charts blanche from my father, on which he begged him to name his own
termsa
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 3I
terms. His reception of me was candid and open; he allured me no alliance could be more plealing to himSelf; but as to his daughter, flie mull follow her own inclinations, which he was determined never to bias; and therefore, Mr. Drummond,” he Said,
t
you have my free leave to gain her heart if you can; his worth the trial, believe me. About terms I am fure we fliall have no difference of opinion, and fo ‘GallonsI*
We repaired to the drawing room, where he introduced me to the trio, who were at work in the bow window.
i	.
I mull confeSs my vanity was a little
/
flattered by the embarraSsment my prefence occalioned to Lady Julia; but file Soon recovered, and rallied as uSual; till with as much gaity as I
could alfume, I proclaimed luySelf
G 4
again
32 WREATH 6F FRIENDSHIP.
again her captive, and for ever at her own diSpoSal. She disclaimed all power over me, and would join in no conversation that made love its theme; upon other topics Ilie was lively, feu-fible, and charming, as ever.
*
I find I mull not make to her a Serious propoSal till I have reinstated mySelf again in her good opinion and friendlliip; the latter of which flie fays is new unrefervedly beftowed on Lord Weftbury; and that She has not a corner of her heart left for any onC' clfe. I Should be moft miferable if I could think this really the cafe; but I mufb allow a little time to wear away die offence her pride has received from my paft behaviour. I flaid Supper, and returned here to rejl, if you pleafe, but not to Sleep. How many
(different fenfations agitate my heart I
anid
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
and “hope and fears alternate riSe,.'”' each as in turn predominate. Lord St. Clair aflced me to dine the next day, to make amends for the apparent indifference of his fair daughter, who-would neither walk, ride, nor do any thing at my requeft. Sometimes I am halfalarmedat her coldneSs, buthavino^'
^	O
a friend in her father is a great conSo-lation; as from that circumftance I have a power of Seeing her every day,, and I believe I Iliall not appear at Wansford very foon while I retain that indulgence.
I went early in hopes of meeting; Lady Julia in the muSie-room, not-vithdanding her affirmation of having
O
But the
bulineSs all the morning, birds were all flown. Upon the table lay the port feule in which were her beautiful drawings. She had been.
c 5
at
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP

atworkupona Cupid in the a6l of drawing his bow ; it was not quite fi* nifhed, and the pencils and the pallet laid ready. licould not refill the temptation 1 felt to complete the figure, and‘ tp add under it tlie following lines
Cupid aiin thy pointed dart At Julia’s cold and flinty heart ;. And bid her Snowy bofom prove.
"' The pains I,feel from hopelefs love.-
“ N, DP
Ii put the paper under Some of the others, with the blank fide uppermoft,. that nor^ but herfelf might fee what I wrote. Sir Horace Winn came unex* peftedly to dinner,, and; we were all affembled Some time before Lady Julia made her appearance. She ex^r p^refled great delight at feeing Sir Horace, who had been abfent with his
••f
A
✓ .
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP , 35
family from the neighbourhood many months, and paid me flight civilities. She was drefled, if you will allow' the expreffion, with the moft ftudied negligence ; but I never faw her look fo • well, or any tlflng fo Amply elegant-as her whole Agure.
is
The conversation became general! and Sprightly. Sir Horace, who is an^ amateur in deAgn, admired Several of Lady Julians drawings.
were
hung about the room, and aAced if Ahe ftill continued that amufement ? ■ “Oh, yes, cloSer than ever:; and I really begin to think I improve. Tilt Ihew you one! am.about; /tis not yet^
quite Anilhed, but you Shall give me' your opinion of it, as it is5. partly from^ fancy, and a Aril attempt.” You wilL imagine I felt a little awkwaref on this ^ occaAon, and withdrew to a . window
k
where.
36 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
where Selina was at work. I entered into chat with her, but kept my eye on the reft of the company. She turned over Some papers, and without calling her eye on the lide of the paper on which the drawing was, gave it to Sir Horace. He looked at it fteadily for fome moments, and then Said, Smiling, poor gentleman 1 really. Lady Julia,
did not think you had been fo cruel!
ec
What
what is it fo entertains you} I fear yon think it a wretched performance Quite the reverfe,, Madam, I think, it exquiftte and I applaud the artift who has added, the accompaniment and put fo high a ftnilh to it.” not finifhed, indeed. Sir, I left it an hour ago, it wanted a great deal of be-
.Dis
c-
ing completed.” “That may be, but now there does not want a Stroke, no, not even the. pop to. an i; here are even
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 37
this initials of the name, which perhaps was needleSs ; but really I wifh to know the whole name of the ingenious youth, for I admire his gallantry
amazingly !
yy
Lord and Lady St
Clair looked, and Julia, quite impatient, eryed, “ sn)\2iXdoyou mean, Sir Horace ? 1 inSift upon knowing thi& excellent joke;’’ and getting up, looked over the drawing as he held it in his hand. Now, fair enflaver, is it not entirely finifhed ? and wonV you take my word another time?”' I was really hurt for the confuSion I had unintentionally been the occafion of; and did not dare raife my eyes to Lady Julia’s. With a prefence of mind all her own, fhe in a moment recovered her perplexity, and called out, ‘ ‘ ah, Selina, this is fome of your’s; how could you be So cruel ?” “ Mine, my dear, I proted I have not feen Gup id
thh
3S
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
this morning.” No, I’ll be Sworn MiSs Courtney has had no hand in it, ’tis too maSculine for her’s; and if Ihe had, the initials belong to homebody whofe misfortunes Ihe is acquainted with, and whofe charader Ihe has Supported with great truth. “ Let me look at it,” Said Lady St. Clair. “ No, indeed, his Such a Ihocking daub it Ihall never fee the
light again.
a
Had you not better
burn it then r” added Lady St. Clair, with a very fly looxk, “No, I Ihall cut out the drawing, and palle it upon, another paper, as it may ferve for a. delign upon which I think I can im-
^ I
prove.” “Let me advife yon^” faid Sir Horace, when you copy it, to make the young gentleman return the dart into its quiver; for in his prefent at- -titude he is a dangerous obje<d:; do not
you think.fo .^” “I,have, had no rea-
fon.
'WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
n
O
9
A
fbn to think Sobefore.’^ ‘‘Then you feel there is reaSon now “
no
in Iliortyou really do pefter and teize-me So I do not know a word I Say.”' She rang the-bell, a Servant came, “Do tell the gardener to gather me a noSe* gay;” “ and tell him,” Said her per-Secutor “if there are any rofeSp to be Sure to cut off the thornS'V He Iliut the-door. “OddSo! he is gone too far, or I would have defired him to bring a little: love lies a bleeding, for Mr. Drum* motidA “ This Itroke completed our^ ©mbarralTment, for mine was quite as great as her Lady Ship’s. “ 1 find,’^' Said flie, “ I mull treat you. Sin Horace, as I do Lord Mordington; and when I can’t lilence him by other

means, I fly. to the Piano,’,' ’
Sir Horace is an univerSal genius> aad,da(hes at every thing; is ^equally
/	tt
s
40 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
as fond of muSicasof its filler art. He followed her, and opened for her the mufic book that laid on the delk: it
t
was Jackfon’s Canzonets. ‘‘
See
there, fiir lady, how impoffible it is for you to change the fubjed:; the fame invifible hand who finished Cupid, has taught your book to open at “ Love in thine eyes forever plays.’* Can any thing be more apropos to his Situation ? But do fing it. Lady Julia, for I admire it much, and Mr* Drummond I know fings the fecondP It never was a favourite of mine,” faidflie, 1 like the next better, and
a
I
you wdli join with me in that ? would, but really we Iliould not fing in tune ; an old voice and a young one make no harmony.”
The fervant who announced dinner dould alone put a Hop to Sir Horace’s
jokes.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 41
jokes, which were become really painful; and I Saw in Lady Julia’s eyes tears of vexation. How did they reproach me for my folly! At table
Julia often addrelled hgi' conversation to me, and talked on trifling matters that had palled at our former meetings ; but 1 Saw too plainly her civility was a force on her inclinations, and I longed moll impatiently for Sir Ho» race’s departure, that I might hav^ a chance of making my peace. It was near eight before he took leave, when, turning to Lady St. Clair, he Said I forgot to tell you that my dame Sent me on purfofe To alk you to a little mufic to-morrow; we have alfo got a party of young folks who love dancing, and they hope, with the addition of your two ladies, to make up a hop. What fay 3^011, aye or no ?” “Oh, will come, you ma^^ deoend on it; a
danco
N
42 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP..
dance is a thing that we love in our
hearts.’^ And you
>
II. D. will have no objedion to joint this party. Your leg is not hampered,, tho* your arm is; and you can dance tho’ you cannot play? Do not fear,, we will get you a partner, xho^JheJJoouU.
I bowed;
a very hearty alfent. “Come,” Said he, “ Lady Julia, Ihake hands, and let us part friends ; I wotet fay a. word about Cupid.” She gave him
9	_
her hand with the utmoft good hu» mour..
be cruel, ” winking at me.
Lord St. Clair attended him down
f
I
flairs; Lady St. Clair withdrew; and the two young ladies and myfelf went to the window to admire Sir Horace^s equipage. Selina ftole off, and before . Ladyjulia was aware we were tete a tete. The moment was not to be loft! and I
made
S r
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 42
made all the uSe of it I could, but Hill file was inflexible, neither Serious reasoning, nor raillery, has yet gained me her pardon; Still I am Sanguine for
'I
“ love will hope, where reaSon would
(
leSpair.

I did not flay Supper, but
thought it right to pay a little attention to my uncle, with whom I am on wonderful good terms; and I have almoft gained his conSent to write to my coufin to return on his own terms; the poor old man is miserable without
him, but has that unactountable obstinacy in his diSpofltion, that it almoH. breaks his heart to make the firfl; advances. Adieu, I am going to meet ‘^all my foul holds dear. ’’ This letter is long enough for a Sermon, but read as far only as you pleaSe, and make allowances for the loquacity of a lover, who is ever your lincere friend,
K D

LETTER
44 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP*
L E T TER
LXIII.
Lady Julia Harcourts to Mrs, Seymodf*
LhlngBon-Abbeyi Augujl %
Cannot give you a more fmcer-c proof of the real fliendfliip I h^ve for you, my Eliza, than by acquainting you with my Sentiments of Drummond’s words and adions. His conduce is exadly the fame it was be&rc his departure; he is lively and agreeable to every one; and at the Same time behaves with a particular attention to mySelf. I cannot fay that is exabUythe caSe with my own behaviour ; I have endeavoured to appear eaSy and indifferent, but I fear it has been only an endeavour. I have many
times
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 45
times deteded mySelf being cold and embarrafled, when I wiHied to be quite the contrary; but I find the keen edge of what I Suffered a little while ago is not yet So entirely worn off, as to make me on any account rifk a Sc--cond Scene.
We were at a concert and ball at Sir Horace Winn’s lafl: night, who is returned once more to Settle in this neighbourhood, and has taken it very much into his head to torment me about Drummond, from two or three circumftances which could not pafs him unnoticed.
The mufic was extremely fine; It was indeed harmony ! When it drew ■near a conclufion. Sir Horace came to
me.
f
‘‘ I was very near propofing to change partners every two dances, but
happening
46 WREATH OF FRlENDSHlF*
happening to call my eye upon you, it Struck me how great a mortification that would be to you ; for I am certain it would not be agreeable So Soon to be deprived of your firfh partner.^* From this prelude, Sir Horace, I begin to flatter my Self, that you intend
I
to do me the honour of afking me yourfelf to dance, as I do not know any one elSe in this room whofe hand I Sliould be So anxious to retain.^’ ‘^Ah! ypu difTembler,” faid he, how can you, with that grave face, utter Such a fallhood ? the initials of my name are
t
notN. D. my pretty Lady Julia, you forget that; but I will inftantly bring the more acceptable partner, and you Shall begin the ball; for in my life I think I never Saw a couple So well fuited.’* Off he W'as polling, but I
I
caught hold of him, “tor pity's fake, Slop, SirHorace, I will not, on any ac*
count.
I
WREATH or friendship. 47
count, dance with Mr. Drummond; and if you are So ungallant as to decline the challenge I gave you, I in-treat you will leavfe me to my fate.’* “ You cannot Surely be in earneft; I am convinced you have not So much cruelty in yolir nature as to doorn So accomplilhed a Swain to deSpair; but if for any ■private reaSon you would rather decline dancing with Mr. Dum-mond at preSent, I will not relign your hand to any in the room; and therefore, gentlemen,” ( handing up and raiSing his voice ) “I beg you will all provide yourfelves with partners aS quick as you can, for I am to have the Supreme felicity of dancing with Lady Julia Harcourt.**
.V
He immediately handed me into the dancing room.. We Spent a very agreeable evening; Sir Horace haS a
fund
Vs
V
4^ WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
fund of chearfulneSs and good humour that gives him the power of making all his friends about him happy ; and his being a married man, and not very young, makes one take the lioerty of faying a thouSand Sprightly things in return, which are Sure to be well taken.
I avoided Drummond as much as I poffibly could, confident with any degree of politenefs, the whole evening. At lad happening to fit careleSsly down at Some didance from the red of the company, he came and Seated him-felf by me. “Tell me. Lady Julia, for heaven’s fake tell me, in what 1 have been So unfortunate as to incuj; your diSpleaSure ; is there no atonement can be made for any part of my pad Gondudl:, that may have odended you ? with pleafure would I Sacrifice
mv
m
3
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 49
my life to procure you happineSs; but the mortifying hegled you at preSent treat me with, wounds my very foul.’* “ I am not confcious, Mr.Drummond, of having ever treated you with negle61; I Ihould wifli my behaviour to be equally attentive and polite to all my acquaintance ; and if any of my ac* tions have been So doubtful as to give you cauSe to miSconftrue them, I in-freat you will have the goodneSs to think it was not intentional, and 1 will
endeavour to corred them.” “ And,
\
can you poffibly think. Lady Julia,
that a polite attention is a return Suf-
\.
ficient for a heart that doats upon you with that warmth of affection that mine

does ! Will you not give me Some hopes, that time, and my unceafing affiduities to pleafe you, will at lait Soften the rigour of your preSent treatment ?” “ Mr. Drummond, I will be
Vol. III.
D
111-
■WREATH OF FTUEK'DSHI’P
ringenuous with you ; there wa^ a time jperhaps, when I felt for you the moil lively friendfhip ; I will not deceive you, more than friendship might have "followed; but that rime is pad: and can never more return! your behaviour ■to me was Such as 1 can never forget; you profelfed a friendship for me, and at the fame time behaved with a re-ferve that would, in my opinion, have been unpardonable in a common ac--quaintance. You had, I make no •doubt your reafons for it; and we mull all Stand or fall by the rectitude of our own hearts. I Should not perhaps have been So explicit at preSent, had I not wished the fubjeft to be dropped for ever. I am inclined to think my fentiments arefuch, as it is not in the power of time, or any circumftance to alter; and tho’ I Shall always be h:ypy to meet Mr. Drummond as an
agreeable
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. Jl
agreeable acquaintance, yet I mull ferioufly requeft, that love and friend-Ihip be forever baniflied from our conversation.’^
Cruel Lady Julia! you know not how deep you have planted a dagger in my breaft by your words^ How painfiiil,to give a glimpfe of happineSs, and then banilh it from my view for* ever; Will you tell me I had once a chance of polleffing all my foul holds dear, and then fay that hope is loll forever by my own folly and ill con-
dudl? Relent! for mercy’s fake, re-
%
lent a little of your feverity! It was Iliame alone that prevented my making you the confidant of my engagement abroad ; the firft moment I beheld you, I Saw the folly of promifing my hand where I could never give my heart!” At this moment we were
D 2
52, WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP,
joined by Sir Horace. “Ha! Monlieur Drummond in a Supplicating tone! It won’t do; take my advice for once, the young lady is not diSpoSed to be kind to you this evening; a word Spoken out of feaSon may do your caufe more harm than good; go, and feek your partner, and I will take care of this cruel fair one for the prefent.” You muft take my partner too then. Sir Horace,” Said Drummond, “for this lady has absolutely rendered me unfit for dancing this evening.”
“ Poor fellow! Lady Julia, ho\y can you be fo unrelenting! 3mu have, I declare, quite transformed this lively, youth into a perfedt Don Difmallo i but now 1 look at you, I do not think you are in much higher Spirits your-felf. 1 begin to think I have interrupted
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
53
rupted you at a moft unSeaSonable juncture; I believe it will be bell to leave you to make up your quarrel again, and go and dance with MiSs Courtney,Ihe was your partner I think, Mr. Drummond?'*
Off he went, and left us in tlie nioft awkward lituation that it was poffible for two people to be in. Drummond fgemed quite unable to fpeak; and you will believe, Eliza, I was not in a condition to help him out. I Sat Some time to recover my Self a little, and then roSe; he attempted to Seize my hand, but I left him haftily, and went to the card room. We Soon after took our leave without feeing him again.
D 3
He
54 WREATH OF FRIENDSHTF.
•A
He has not been here this morning; I rather fuSpeCt he is gone ta Wansford. When yon know more
of him you will find him a great
&
addition to your fociety.. He is an,
I
agreeable man, and deServes to be happy ! but it muft never be with your
Julia Liar court*
I.DTTER
/
ATH'OF. FRIENDSHIP..
5:^-
L E T T E R' LXIV.
Mrs. Se\'mourf d.o Lady JaUa Harcoitrt.
fEansfirdAioiifet ^Auguji 4,
N Friday, my friend, I promiSe mySelf the pleaSure of introducing my caro fpofo to my dear Lord and Lady St. Clair; , and my fond heart tells me I fhall meet with their full approbation of my choice.
\
. J flatter my Self, my dear Selina will
not retrad the promife Ihe made of
returning home with me ; pray re- •
mind her of it, and tell her I will not*
excuSe her. I think, Julia, I mull..
bring with me Some of thofe inJlrufUve:
%
letters I have been favoured with from
D 4
you


WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
:
I
: h
you, on the flibje£t of matrimony. You fee they have made a convert of me; perhaps the perufal of them might foften your own heart towards poor Drummond. I perfectly agree with you in regard to his former behaviour, it was extremely reprchen-fible. But, fha II we not receive a penitent, when we are convinced that his contrition is fincere ? recolledl your own favourite fpeech from Shake-fpear on Mercy, ‘Mt is twice blefSed; it biefleth him that gives, and him that receives.And in this cafe if I am not greatly miftaken, the blefling would be mutual. Forgive me, Julia^ but I am Sure you put a violence on
your own
when
you give
Drummond pain. I am called away. Mr. Seymour wifhes me to walk with him. Adieu, till my return.
We-
I i
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
57
We have had a moft delighful walk.
f
We went thro* the wood, and palTed thoSe cottages on the other fide of it. As we were fauntering along enjoying the cool breezes and the melody of the feathered fongflers,. a woman came haftily out of one of the houSes, and begged Mr. Seymour to go for five minuted to. fpeak to her hufband,. as he was much better, and wifhed to fee
him. Seymour turned to' me, and faid,
0
if you will ex.cufe> me. my Eliza,, I will attend him immediately.** affented.. As foon. as he came near.
r	#	•
the, door, four little children, came running to him with every mark of affedion and gratitudehe fpoketo them all with inexpreflible kiiidnefs,.

and then went to> their father. The poor woman*^ eyes were filled" with
tears; lafkcd.her how her ^ as. I prefumed tliofe were ). came to

be
58
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
be So well acquainted with Mr. Seymour? ‘‘Oh, Madam!’* exclaimed

fhe, “ there is not a perSon on earth to whom they are So much obliged. We.
/	I	'
have only . lived here about three months; my hulband came to work with a farmer in this neighbourhood but foon after we were fettled in our
r
houfe he was taken ilb; and both he#
• . ■ ■ • ...
myfelf, and thofe fopr helplefs infants
f
muft have been fiatved, but for . the kindnefs and charity, of Mr. Seymour; imdwe are under Still greater obligar tions to hirti, for giving, my hpfband a proper idea of, religion. As’ he.is now a good man,! may venture to fay what he once was. Indeed you can have no notion how very , wicked he
..was, at the time he was taken ill; a
\ .•_/*.<. ....
worfe huSband, or worfe father, never
#
noor woman and helplefs innocents
hads
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP*
.59')
had. Now he is all kindneSs to me, and affedfion to his .children. This blefled reformation did Mr. Seymour make! Judge then. Madam,...if, we have not reaSon to be grateful.' He'a« ven I hoperwill reward his piety.’’
The poor woman’s .tears flowed lo > fall Ihe could proceed no further. Sey~ mour returned jtift as Ihe. had done • Speaking. He obServed the ftarting tear in my eye,, and prelfed my handL . with a Smile that would have adorned-> an angel’s face.
You, Julia, can form- no of the raptwe which Jn that moment glowed in my bofom. . The fond delight with which I viewed my Seymour^?:and the>real gratitude I felt to heayen for placing me ih.a State of
haa

I
j
tt ^ !!
it
II
i!;
III
i t
Hr
it
il
l!li
iii
II"
iii
I
li
!!
ii
I-
• r
iv
ii!
hi
hi
f'
:• t
!r
!!
I	1 4 H
II
iiL
1-j
i'is
0.8
t r
ii:
Ml
' I!
•. I '»
II
11
,1
!i.'
I- lO
lb
;ll't
'• 1
■ , 1
' • 1

’»! b
i I
\>l I
M.i
• r
4o WREATH OF FRIENDSMIF-.,
pinefs which, few enjoy! I would not
have given up the true blifs I felt the
0
remainder of our walk, for the wealth; of worlds.
v\
But I (halt tire you with a fubjedt. which perhaps at prefent may not be
theme ;, but when yow are married^ you wWl^n-di how much, more plealing your hufband'a praifes; are than your own.
evmour^.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP,
LETTER LXV.
Menny Drummontij ESq. to
Drummond.
JVejihury-Lodgey Auguji 5..
OtJ' alk me, my dear Mother, what Succefs I have in my fmt^ The quellion is foon anfwered. Lalt: night I received from I.ady Juliai z,/poJitive refufal; and yet, tho’ hurt I am not difpiritedl
\

At the fame time my fair enflav^
me for ever as a lover, fhe* told me> that once her heart was. inclined to think favonrahly of me.*' Now tell me, my dear Lady D, ( you; who know your own fex fo well, andl hay.e. fo attentiyely ftudied the humane
heart),
. >
■ (
f • >
J
loi
tIO >' > L
9
• • •
t I .
II
I!;
I I
. i
>»
H

;?! ;C
i I
V
*« •
?
.1»
li-
tf
i
{i *
i'
u i
' :>
■ K
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
hleart ) if this very Sentence does not
authorize me to cheriSh a flattering,
tho’ perhaps a diftantihope.. I am in-
clined to believe, Julia has no other
prcpoffellion,. and on that expeeiation
my heart exults; but Hill I have a
thouSand fears inSeparable from real
afFecIion. At the Same time that I
feel her Severity, I cannot but com
mend her reSolution.,
I did not go, to the Abbey this ,
morning, as uSual; I was buSy writing
a long letter^to-Weftbury, partly at
my uncle^s defire, to recal him. Poor
old man ! he can no longer Support
my coufin’s abSenee, or his own rcr
Sentmentand I have painted, Selina’s
( i
charader in colours "So amiable and
attradive, that he no longer objeds
IQ their union; and I have the SatisSac-
U<M, \

..v-st:
. r
• a tk


WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP'
V
6

♦
tionof thinking however I am diSpoSed,, of, Charles will be happy..
WJien I. roSe. this morning Lady Julia’s behaviour Hill. oppreHed me, . and I deterinined not to go to Living-flpn for two or three days. But I could not re lift the pleaSure of giving eaSe to the heart of MiSs Courtney. I therefore left my uncle at his coffee,
•	#	I
and took my journey on foot.. I met the fair friends at the end of the Park: they turned; about with me, and we
proceeded to the houSe,
Julia
reception of me was coldneSs itSelf. ^ I, I make no doubt, looked very foolilfi; a.,comfortable fituation ! I Said-1 per^ ceived I was. an unwelcome intruder
j	.
on their folitude, but I flattered 'myfelf the intelligence I brought would for ifice enfure me a friendly reception* f5Jt, defei'ves a high reward, but I
am

.	• A
ifl
Ut
d
III
' i
;i|
f
t
I
j
Ilf
ir. u.
I •
64
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
am reafbnablb, and' alk only a Smile.
I am Sure of receiving it fromyt)u, Se-
%
lina; and flatter mySelf even Lady Julia will deign tO' look, on me with greater kindneSs, tho^ I Ihall have.
t
more reaSon to aScribe it to her friendr fliip for you than to any merit of my
’ After this formal introduc-
0
lion, I related the fubftance of my prefent embalTy. Poor Splina Smiled thro’ her tears; the amiable and afScG-tionate Julia very heartily Sympathized with her friend; for her heart is open ta every impreflion, butt
own.
Mils Cburtney thanked me^r the haews,, and added flie believed it waste me alone they were indebted' for this wonderful change ih my '“ How will this adt of frie'ndihip for
ever enSure you our gratitude ahd af-
fe<Stion.**
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 65
fed ion.” The poor girl was over»
#
come with the agreeable intelligence, and very readily accepted my arm the reft of the walk; I durft not offer the other to Julia, tho^ I believe it would not at that moment have been rejeded^ The hurry of all our fpirits being a little abated, I afked if Lord St. Clair was at home .N as I wilhed to fee him to return him thanks for the hand-fome manner in which he had behav--ed to me, and for that candour and generolity which my cruel fate allowed me not to profit by ; to Some happier man I muft leave that bliSs I had the temerity to aim at, not confidering that the eagle alone can gaze on the fun with impunity. Forgive me. Lady Julia, if in the laft hour I ftiall fpend with you,I cannot help touching a little on the oldSubjed. To-morrow
I leave the lodge, and this fair field, ta
Xi\f

66
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIB'
niy happy rival ; iiothing remains for me now but to inform him I am nos
4	*
longer an obstacle to his wilhes.” “TOv whom do you mean to give this information, Mr.. Drummond “To, Lord. Malbourne, Madam; can I do^ leSs, after the honourable manner in: which he withdrew his addrelTes. om my account
'‘ Upon my word, I do not under* Hand thefe points ,of etiquette between > you 3 gentlemen; all I know is^ that,-it will be extremely diSagreeable to ’	“ What then would you have.
me.
me do. Lady: Julia ?’* “Follow your own judgment; fubjedls of this naturo become foon enough the topics of public conversation.’* “That may be die cafe. Madam, but I a'm Sure you would defpiSe the man who could be
i	'
.either unjuft or ungenerons to an old
friend.’^
/
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
67
“ You leave this neighbourhood tomorrow, Mr. Drummond ; do you mean to go to Wansford?’^ ‘‘ No, Madam, I Iliall go home.” “ Could not the preSence of two friends tempt you to alter your reSolution for a few days ^ Mr. and Mrs. Seymour, are to be with us on Friday ; and I think they would be much difappointed to find you gone the day before they came.” “TheSe are indeed powerful temptations; if I could flatter myfelf my flay would be pleaSant, to all par-
Ic
» iC
tics, 1 Ihould gladly yield to it. will be So, if you will ceaSe to converSe on the only fubjecl that can make it
otherwise.” ‘fThat fubjeft, and its author, will I hope offend no more; but perhaps, Lady Julia, we might be friends, tho^ you fay we can be no thing more ?” Come, come, Ju-
X
lla,” Said the Sweet Selina, do not
refuSe:
: I
r 1
68
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
refuSe him that poor boon on Such a night as this. My Soul is all peace, let your*s be fo too. He deServes that 1 fhould entreat for him ; and you do not often refuSe nry requefts ?** Julia gave me a trembling hand! her eyes were filled with tears ! what a moment was that! and how eager was my
heart to pour
all its tendernefs:
but I wait for one ftill more propitious,
My dear mother, what will you % to all this Scene, interefting alone to
the adlors in it ? but toyott only do I deScribe fuqh, and only now to give you an idea of our prefent lituation. Write to me immediately, and give me your advice and opinion.; tell me alfo that yourSelf and my father are well, and think of me; no intelligence can be more plealing to your moll affedionate
H. R
♦ •
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 69
LETTER LXVI.
Mrs. Seymoury. to Lady Julia IIarcourt.
' JVansford-Houfe^ Auguji 12, Ten at Eight.
_ ________
HOLD a promise Sacred at aU
times, but more particularly So when given to a friend we love and efteem. I am determined not tolleep till I have performed that I made you at parting, of giving you the earlieft intelligence of our Safe arrival at home. We had as agreeable a journey as it was poflible, when our hearts told us every Hep we took made the diftance greater from you I However, Selina performed it very well, and I have great hopes that the change of place, and the variety Ihe may meet with,
A
added

I
li’

A
70
WREATH OP FRIENDSHIP.
added to the pleafing intelligence flic had received from Mr. Drummond, will reftote‘both her health and Spirits. I will not fay with how much regret we left Livingllon and its dear inhabitants, but will leave that for your lively imagination to paint The poll goes out early to-morrow morning, and the late hour we arrived at home' this evening, mull be my apology for fo Ihort a letter; a fault not often committed by your
J
Eliza Seymour.
LETTER
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.

LETTER LXVII.
Mrs. Seymours to IAdy Julia Harcourt.
JEansford-Houfe, Auguji 15.
AM Sorry, my beloved friend, to to be under the dilagreeable ne-ceffity of giving you pain. But as Selina and myfelf fat working this morning, the newfpaper was brought us; Ihe took it to read to me, and calling her eye over it, inftantly
. I flew to her alliftance time enough to prevent any bad confe-fqiiences from her fall. Seymour heard cme Scream, and fortunately came to 'Our relief. I flattered myfelf it was
the heat of the room that had been too
• '
much for her ; but our alarm was
great
\
72 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
great indeed when we found the moment her fenSes feemed returning, Ihe again fainted. In' this ftate Ihe continued near an hour. We Sent im-
i
mediately for a Surgeon, but before he arrived a flood of tears had relieved her burftingheart.
As Soon as Ihe could Speak Mr. Seymour conjured her to tell what had So greatly agitated her; with fome difficulty, Ihe cried “Welfbury is dead,” and again fainted. We put her to bed, and the furgeon took a little blood from her, and Ihe Seems now much more compofed.
She has juft told me that the Ihip in which Lord Weftbury embarked, is loft, and all the crew. She upbraids herfelf Severely for being the caule of this misfortune; and in the moft melting
language
WREATH OF friendship
n
[anguage grieves Sor his ditlrelTed pa*-rent. Her agonies are far beyond my description. I have in vain endeavoured to Sooth her Ibrrows with a gleam of hope, that Ihe may be mistaken in the name of the Ship ; that is impoflible Ihe fays, it has never-lbr a moment been baniflied from her
mind lince Ilie lirft heard it: her
/ ' ^
boding heart told her when they parted, it was for ever, and now her dreadful fears are all realized.
I have never left her for a moment, nor will I till I have your anSwer. I fend this by a Servant, with orders to return with all poliible Speed. That you, my Julia, may be able to Send conSolation to your diftrelfed friends, is the prayer of your
mi za Seymour.
Vol. III.
E
LETTER

11
I • •
il
'Mil
If!!
Ml!
IT-'
1 il!
I,
vn
III
f
n
) <
i!
f
I
i: ; 1
I '
! I
I i
74 WREATH m FRaiNDSHI?.
LETTER. LXVIIL
Mifs Courtneyf to Lady Julia Harcourt.
JVansfard-JiouJe^ Auguji i5h.
AISED from the deepeft abyfs of defpair to a height of joy almoft inSupportable, your Selina, with trembling hand, once more takes her pen, to make her beloved Julia a partaker ;of her prefent happineSs.

Weftbury lives I To defcribe tfie tranfport, the thankfulnefs that filled my bread: when that welcome news was imparted to me, is impoflible! Words would but poorly expreSs my feelings at that inftant. How many
reafons has your friend for gratitude ?
how
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 7;^
1
how often when prelled hard by misfortunes, has my rafhneSs almoll Tempted me to think that I was deSert-
ed by providence ; and as I have been
\
almoft giving way to deSpair, Some kind hand has interpoSed to Succour and relieve me, and reftored my burll-ing heart once more to CaSe and tran-
I have begged Mrs. Seymour's
leave to encloSe you her friend Mrs.
%
Scudamore’s letter, which is the cauSe of all our preSent felicity, and ‘ which will give a much more accurate description of the whole tranC adion than I am at preSent capable of doing. Oh, my Julia! by what Siirange means forhetimes are our greated blef-fings brought about ? and how blind
fhould we be to our own interefts, were
E 2
we

Ml ml ;
» )

i
>1
If
! 1

li
i
f; »
» '
I;
M
76, WREATH or FRIENDSHIP.
we leSt to follow the dilates of our
erring imaginations

This Ilorm which has already given us all fo much real angiiiSli, will be the cauSe of Wellbury’s returning to England; and I hope he will not again truft the mer-cileSs ocean
with a life 10 precious to all who know
«
him. I p h rd Mordington has before this time had an account from himSelf of his Safety; I am certain he understands the duty which he owes a father too well, to neglefl one moment writing to him after he had it in his power. 1. is poffible however, , that Mrs. Scudamore’s letter might have been ready written when they met with the boat, a precaution he might not; hink of taking, and which may consequently prevent the intelligence for a poll or two coming from
himfelf.
WREATH OT FRIE'NDSHIP ‘]J
himSelf.^ Left that fliould be the caSe, Mr. Seymour will Send a Servant with this immediately ; as we are anxious to relieve from the trouble and uneaSneSs which I am afraid you ate at prefent labouring under.
You can fcarcely imagine the kind-neSs, the affedion, which has-been Iliewn me by Mr. and Mrs. Seymour; they entered So warmly into all my feelings, and indeed did every thing that friendfhip could Suggeft to afford me one ray of comfort and confolation ,
but it was all in vain.
When I
thought Weftbury had periftied, no earthly confideration could throw one gleam of confolation upon my wounded mind; the onlv fatisfadlion I re-ceived was in reflecting that my weak, frame could not fupport the agonies I endured, and that a ftiort time would
E 3	ter-
it

,u
■U
it'
i!
i
i
I i
Ip
' I'
Jl'.
Ifi
" I I
h
i :
L
t
r.
i
i i
;
[fh
'iil
ii
(h
!t t
u
I
E'l

H
i
%VR,1ATH OF FRIENDSH-fPv
minate my Sorrows., But I will not diftreSs you, my friend,, by dwelling upon Scenes which are paft, and ought only to be remembered with a Yiew to make us more grateful for the blciSings we now enjoy.
Adieu, my deareft Julia ! my head and hand are neither of them compoSed

enoiidi to allow me to write much
o,	^
more. ThcSe hafty lines will however feiwetoeaSe your mind, and convince you that happineSs is once more i|l the pofleflion of your
Scltna Courtney
LETTER
WREATH 0f-FRIEND^HTI?*
r	t? T' 1? It
JL^ Jc^ JL	Jk Jm
Mj's. BcuAamorSf to Mr§, Sijmour
Auiuji 10, Writim at Sea^
E are now fo near England, that a few hours will bring us in fight of that promifed land. I write this therefore to my Eliza, that I may fend it by the firft boat that comes off to ns, and give you myfelf the firft intelligence of our Safety. It is pofiible the ftorra w^e have experte enced may not have extended far, and that you have had no fears for us; but
I
leaft you fhould, I think it beft to Set your heart at. eafe as Soon as
pofiible.
E 4
A
r
1
• \
So WREATH OF'FRIENDSHIP.
/
A few days ago I had given up all
hopes of ever feein
hill
you again,
our Spirits fhould meet in thoSe bleft
regions inhabited by faithful friends.
Every thing but the profpe£t of Eter-
nity had vanilhed from my light, and
fickneSs and fear destroyed all deSire of
life. Indeed v/e were all perfectly re

Signed to that fate which Seemed ine-
vitably to await U3; but that power.
whoSe majefty in Scenes like theSe is
awfully displayed, choSe to reServe us.
I hope for future good. Already has
he miade us the means of preservation
to Some, perhaps, valuable lives.
The ftorm which I am fpeaking of.
began fix days ago, after a moft de
lightful calm.
I had almoll lived up-
on deck for Some time, but the wind
Suddenly changed, and it became in
jfk moment a perfed hurricane. If
there

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 81
♦
there are any perSons who can on Such an occalion be tranquil and recollefted , to thoSe I muft leave the description of this war of elements; a talk, I con-
N
feSs I am utterly unequal to. For three days and nights we drove at the mercy of the winds and waves, every moment expefting that the next would be our laft; but when the Strength of the Sailors, and the Spirits of all were juft gone, the ftorm abated, and hope once more reanimated our hearts.
As Soon as our immediate danger appeared to be over, Mr. Scudamoi© went upon deck. He deSired me to give him the teleScope, ‘‘ .Dis poS-fible,*^ Said he, “ Some poor wretches, may,like us, have outlived theSe dreadful hours; but leSs able to ftruggle,, may want that affiftance which vve
E 5
h a v e

WREATH OF FRrENOSHTP.
liave bellow..^’
in. our power to
It was a, prefentlment Surely infpired by the Deity, for he had not long_ looked about, ere, at a vad diftance^
like a boat. He no Sooner mentioned this SurmiSe,, than feveral of the Sailors acknowledged they had heard a gun go off; they now fuppofed it mud have been, fired by Some in didreSs, but till this, moment they, had never given the circumdance a thought, having been* Solely occupied by their own danger. Mr. Scudamore begged a be fired^ which after a little time was anfwered, and the boat was become perceptible to the naked eye. In an hour or two it arrived along fide the
fhip, and presented, I am told, a piteous fpedacle; but I was not yet re-covered..
un might;
V
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP

0
covered from my illnefs or itiy fright, and only heard of the event from my Lionel, who was almoft frantic with joy to have beeri the happy inftrument of faving a defpairing fellow creature* His generous heart feels with enthu-fiafm the will to do good; and when; united with the power,, his fenfations: are not to be defcribed.
The crew of the boat confifted of fix perfons; four of them were Sailors, the others a young gentleman and hisv fervant, who had been paffengers in? die unfortunate vefTelthey had quitted.. But they Ihared equally the labour of rowing, and not being ufed to hard-
fhips, were leSs able to bear them; and
1
with cold, wet, and hunger, they were: reduced to a very weak, ftatei. Good; nurling has reftored the whole party,, and the young gentleman to day
1/^
n
M
11
• ’»! 1
j •
i!
/
S4 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
joined onr fociety in the cabin. Our captain has furnifhed him with cloaths and linen, which tho’ they do not fit exa(5tly well, yet his perScn and manners are fo elegant as to make us overlook thoSe trivial matters. I have not
/
yet learnt his name; he Ilrives to be chearful, but has an air of melancholy which clouds a fine countenance, and which we women conjedure of courfe proceeds from fome tmfortunate attachment, or fome difafterous cataf-trophe, the remembrance of which he was flying from. Not a fyllable of this may be true, but our wits you know muft work upon Something, and this is a fine fubjed.
. I had not laid down my pen an hour after writing the above, when
\
((
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 85
my hulband called to me to go upon deck. I am never dilatory in complying with his requests, and pointing towards England, he Said, “ there, my love,behold the white cliffs of our dear little island.I jumped for joy, and clafping my hands together, exclaimed, ‘‘ then heaven be praiSed, I may fee Eliza Darnley once more!
Darnleyl Ma^am?*’ re-echoed the ftranger, who was at my elbow,. “ Then you muji be the Mrs. Scudamore She has expedled with anxious folicitude?” ‘‘ The very fame. Sir; but tell me inSlantly, are you alfo her friend ? indeed if you know her you muft be fo.** In Short, Eliza, it was I/trI Wejtbury, whom Sihguiar fate had made our companion; and what

I think Hill more Sing-ular is

that r
who have not a grain of romance in my own composition, am forever


I"
li
‘i i
ft •
i''
: J
: I i
I :
lii
!! i
T:
ii:
if ■:
1:1 = < 1 *
j
II
[l
\
$6 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
defined to be the historian of thoSe who have ; an employment ill calculated for a fober mortal like myfelf.
My new acquaintance told me he was not only your friend., but the friend of your hujhand,. as you have exchanged your own name for that of the moll v/orthy man in the world.. I cannot exprefs to you the hurry my fpirits and affedions were in, to be: latished of every circumftance in regard to you. I aiked fo many questions, made fo many enquiries, all in a breathy that Lord Weft bury muft.
have had an hundred tongues to have:
%
been able to give anfwers to themalh Nn one could be more delirous to> Satisfy my curiolity than he was ; and

you will have nothing to tell me when
we meet, as I know your whole life
and. adventures; and not only your's
but
(M |i
It
I
•I
ll
WREATH OF FRTENDSHIP.
87
Lord Weftbury’s too, for this, rencontre inSpired mutual confidence;-and we are now no longer ftrangers,, polite and civil to each, other, but friends of an hundred years old.-What pleaSure do I experience in giving you intelligence of the fafety of your friends; and’ how thankful to^ that providence who puts it in my-
power
The Ihip in which Lord Weftbury^ embarked was only juft got out of ' the Channel when the ftorm began; the mafter and five, of the men were-waftied overboard before the re--mainder took to their boat, in which they had been forty hours when they efpied our fail, the firft glimpfe of fefety they had been blefled witho,
W eftbury
believe.

88 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
eauSe of his dejeded countenance, and I think I can See that the light of land is not to him a very unpleaSant proSpedt, and he is inclined to partake of the general joy.
I am So -very defirous to quit an element on which we have encountered Such ^(langers, that I hope Mr. Scudamore will indulge me in taking the hrft opportunity of doing fo, and
getting into any little boat that comes
«
pIF to us, and make the beft of our way to town ; when after a few days fpent in adjufling our affairs, we mean to claim the welcome of both your hufband and yourfelf at Wanf-ford Houfe. Our new and agreeable friend w ill be of our party till different routs oblige us to Separate.' I tell him providence has been bufily employed in planning his future happi-
neSs,
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 8:9
neSs, and that it forbids him anymore to
banifh himfelf from the objedl of his
* A
attachment. He fmiles and calls me his excellent comforter; and agrees to follow my advice till he fhall find ( what he fears ) that my hopes are fallacious.
Farewel, my dear friend, a boat is arrived by which I fend this, but as they are not officers of the cuftoms, but thoSe who come t'^ buy our contraband goods, we do not think it prudent to accept the temptation. Lord Wedbury and Mr. Scudamore join me in every good wijfh to you and your’s.
Your mod faithful,
Emily Scudamore.
*
LETTER

i;
r!
li t
Hi
i|ii

1
: ! i
I'lr
1 Ti’
lij
' I !
ill
i: j {
I i'
'i*jj''
i ill! * ill!:
i,h : 'III I hi, ,
■iUl i
nil
hi! I
!|1*
l!i
ifi
b'l'i
!i {I I iU ]
ill
.f'i i
■,:U j Jt j
lii U
»t
I :n
I
it
I

t:
{>
1*1
L I
ii
1*1
.It
}
il >
1?*’, < site!'
liite
i
ll
is
I
90 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIFj
LETTER
LXX.
I.aih JuM Hareourt, to Mifs
Lmnglhn-Abbey^ Augufi 17
OU will, I doubt not, give me credit for the anxiety I have lately felt on account of the fufferings of my beloved Selina. Mrs.^ Seymour's letter threw us all into the deepeft af-fli(5tion ; my jmother and myfelf wept with unbounded forrow for, the loSs of Wellbury; and my father’s, Soul is of too, Sympathizing a. nature to bear un* moved fo, melanchply an event.
As Soon as I could recover mv
4
voice fuxEciently to be able to Speak, I requefted my mother’s leave to go to
Wansford,
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Ot
w
Wansford. Tho’ I cannot adminifter comfort to Selina, it will at lead bo a fatisfadion to me to be with her, and endeavour all in my power to alleviato that grief which there is reaSon to fear (he will too feverely experience/' mother immediately agreed to my propofal, and it was determined I fhould fet od* in the morning. We retired early; when the mind is labouring under a weight of forrow, even the company of thole we love becomes areftraint.
In the morning as foon as I was informed the carriage was ready, I took leave of my friends, and was haftening to it, when as I entered one door of the hall,Drummond came to the other. He was pale and languid ; his countenance expreflive of the molt fettled melancholy^ and it Seemed with dif-
92 WREATH OF FRiENDSHi?*
' ficulty that he Supported himSeif, As
Soon as I law him a thouSand ideas ^
• *
crowded themSelves into my imagina.'
#
tion; I found it impoffible longer to reftrain my feelings, and finking into a chair near me, a violent flood of i tears gave a little relief to my opprelt
heart. 1 find, L.ady Julia,” Said he, coming up tome, it wiH now be unneceifary to explain the pu'rport of, .this vific; you are already apprized of the melancholy occafion of it.” ‘‘Then alas!” Said I, “ all hope is at an end; : you have had the dreadful news confirmed, and there is not one ray of confolation remaining.” “For heaven’s fake,” faid he, “do not thus give way to deSpair; we have received only newSpaper intelligence; and I ftill have hopes that my friend may be
fafe.
’> (6
Vain hope,” faid I, “ all is
now over, for Weftbury
Dead
WREATH OF FRISJODSHlT. 93
Dead ere his prime, and has not left his peer.” ‘‘ But whither are you going, Lady Julia, you Seem prepared for a Journey, I hope you are not going aione; in the State of mind you feern to be in at prefent, you will be in g.reati.want of company.” ‘d am going,” Said I, ‘Vto Selina.” Poor girl!” Said Drummond, and the big tear rolled down his cheek as he Spoke, how much I wilh .Dcould attend you; but you will not adtept of me for a companion. I came to requeft Lord St. Clair would be fo kind as to ’go along with me, and endeavour to footh my uncle’s mind; the violence of his own temper is now entirely fallen upon himSelf, I cannot exprefs his diftradion.” Poor Lord Mor-dington,” Said I, “ his j>eace of mind mud be gone for ever ; tVho can bear
C	^
the refledion that they had once a Son
like
/
/
il


94 WRIATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
like Wellbury, and loll him by the
perverSeneSs. of their own diSpofi
tion!
3}
Jufl as I Spoke a fervant came to
me with a letter, as he Said, from Mr.
Seymour./‘Then,Said I, “Selina
my dear Selina, is fallen a vidim to
her attachment.” I took the letter, and
endeavoured to open it but in vain,
my agitation was So violent I could
not break the Seal.” “ Will you give
me leave to affill you/’ Said Drum-
mond ? “ Let me iikewiSe perfuade
you to calm and compoSe your mind
a little; you will really make yourfelf
ill by the warmth of your own feelings;
this letter is from Mifs Courtney!”
This alfurance revived me a little, Itook
the paper, and running my eye hafti
ly over it, what different fenSationj
inftantly took polfeinon of my bread:*
I
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
95
I gave it to Drummond to read ; you, my Selina, will be able to judge by your own feelings what our’s were at that moment. He was absolutely transported; he begged my permiffion to carry Mrs. Scudamore’s letter to Lord Mordington, which you may be Sure I complied with. I returned immediately to the drefllng room, where I had left my mother, to make tier a partaker of my joy.
In the afternoon Drummond came again. Lord Mordington accompanied him. You never Saw a poor old man in fo ftrange a way ; he was in a ftate between laughing and crying the
whole time he was with us.
He
blamed himfelf as being the cauSe of Weftbury’s misfortune, ^‘But I am now Sorry, extremely forry for my raftinefs; and if you, my Lord St.Clair,
will
i>6
WREATH OF FRII^^DSH1P

will^end for your Selina, I will with pleasure bellow my Son upon her; they fliall be happy in their own way.
s
I have not forgot that She would not marry him without my conSent. She is I believe a good girl, and Such ftrid ideas of duty ought to be rewarded.”
I could hardly credit my fenSes; -that | Lord Mordington Ihould reaSon thus, i
.	I
was aftonifliing! My father applauded | his defign. I will venture, my
r
Lord, to give my confent for Mifs Courtney ; tho’ fhe is not here to anfw^er for herfelf, Ihe is above difguife, and will not keep a man that loves her in fufpenfe. I have long Seen her partiality for Lord Wellbury; nothing could give me more real pleaSure than to fee them united.” “I am glad of it,” Said Lord Mordington, “ then we Shall not dif'gieeon thatfubjedl; and now I have to beg . your interference
in
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 97
in another affair. There fits a poor fellow, a great deal more than half melancholy, and Sorry am I to add, it is for love, a foolilh dog! love fora girl that does not deServe him; a girl that would gladly have had him when he was engaged to another w'oman,but who becatiSe he is now at liberty, and offers her his hand in an honourable way, muft fliew her airs forSooth Let
me intreat you, uncle.” “And let me intreat you, nephew, to hold your tongue; I will not bear to be di6lated to by you-even in my beft humours; but let me tell you. Lady Julia, you are a filly girl for trifling away your own happineSs. He will make you a good hufband, I will anSwer for him; had you Seen his affeOiion, the tenderneSs he file wed to me laft night, when 1 was plunged into ^the deepefl aflliftion a human being can be fenfible of, I be-
Vol. III. •	F	iievc
I ;

* ;
b! i
|:i!
ii!
» \ •
; i * (
1 .
n
1
; i
1 1
il
^"8
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
heve it would have Softened even your hard heart a little.’’ That is a Subject, Said my father, I am determined never to interfere in. I honellly con-
feSs I did not like Mr. Drummondh
behaviour the laft time he was here; but he has now cleared that up entirely, and if Julia thinks Ihe can be happy with him, flie has my full confent, but I will never perfuade her.” ‘‘There now, that is exactly your cha-radter,” Said Lord Mordington, “ you are the molt perverfe man I ever met with. Why will not you renounce your errors, as I have done mine; will you carry that obftinate temper of your’s to the grave ?” >
1 was going to tell you in the moft methodical manner imaginable, all that was faid on this occafion; how Drummond pleaded, and I relented;
bul
Breath of fRiene>^hi>*
but it very fortunately occurred to mC’, that tho’ I might write vVhat he fald^ i could not nmke you, my Selina, fert-
g
fible how he looked at that moment \ and you might perhaps think I was too ealily Softened. But it was ho fuch thing, for tho^ I did prOmife riot to be quite fo cruel in future, it was only a fort of probationary bulinefs t thtit if he continued to behave welL at the end offix ox feven yton's, I might perhaps at the expiration of that time, be tempted to give him my hand.
And now, my friend> let me eorii
✓
gratulate you upon the profped of happinefs which I hatter myfelf is before you; for tho* we knew a little or Lord Mordington’s change of fenti-ments before you went away, yet I confefs I had my fears that it was only at Drummond’s earpeft intreaties, and
F 2
that

100 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
that he would again relapSe as the time approached. But this ftorm has I think, affrighted him So much, that he Seems now completely fixed in his good intentions.
Drummond has juft called to telS us that Lord Mordington has had a letter from his Son, with an account. of his efcape. How much I Should | like to fee this Mrs. Scudamore, that has been the means of Ib much hap-j pinefs to us all; and to none more!
I
* L
than your
ynlia Harcouru

' 1
LETTER
t-
. y
^ -
f
I I
;
/
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. lOI
.1
N
L E T TER LXXI
Henry Drummond, Efq. to Lady
Drummond,
JVejlhury-Lodgey Augujl 19.
My Dear Mother,
HERE is not any thing I have
So absolute an averlion to as re-
ceiving and paying morning vilits in the country ; it runs away with the bell part of that time we can never recal and leaves nothing behind to. make amends for the lofs, or that can afford one pleafurable idea. I have been reflefting upon this abuSe all the afternoon, having received fredi provocation this morning; and think I could write an effay upon the Subject
F 3	that
• I
if
} 1
! i
I
I- 1
: i
I ♦
I I
I !
1 i
. 1
.1 ‘
!f
i I 1 ■ 11 I
t,
; t 1
- I ?
. : 1
li i
'! ;
I' I
JtQ-2-	WR B ATH OF F R IE N D S HI ?.
that might be of uSe to the world. But I Satisfy myfelf with reSolving, when Julia and! are married, never to beat home to thefe idle people. You fee I really begin to talk with confidence of being married to the idol of my heart; and had it not been for the grievance I
have already complained of, I might
*
#
at this time have been able to tell you the day which is to crown my felicity, and make me in my own opinion the moft enviable pcrfon, in the three
I breakfafted this morning at the* Abbey, and was enjoying a charming; conversation with Lady Julia, when the whole female family of the Wynn’s came in, and deflroyed in a moment the labours of an, hour. You know I am very fond of arithmetic, and was at momeat working a Sum in reduce'
tion,..
11' ’
I ,
fh !
II • r
111
ilL
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. lOj
tion. Julia had promiSed, on mf Sood behaviour to reward me with
O
her hand in ftx or fev-en years; I had jufl reduced this eternity into montb'Sy and was proceeding to bring^ it- irtto-tveeks tavidi daySf when theSe fair time-killers n^de their appearance^. ben*> on Haughter and deftrudfion. Away ilew reaSon and all her Sober train, and* left behind her nothing but folly, ri»* dicule, infatiable curiofity, and affed-atioR. Love, it is true, crept into my boSom, and endeavoured to conSole m§ for my disappointment; but amon fuch a Society, he durfl not Iliew hia* head. My mortification, I believe^ was very viSible. Julia I law langhed^^ at my dillreSs; and the Miffes, I believe took notice of it, and lengthened-' their viSit, refolving to punilh me for my want of attention to their charms. Every objed; however but my love is
F 4
to


ll
• I
t
t :
104 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
to me an abSolute blank ; and in her eyes ,I read all the knowledge I wilh
V
to poffeSs at preSent. I doubt not, you would have a defire to know how this agreeable change in my circum-dances has been brought about ? Even by marvelous events, the interposition of benevolent genii, by ftorrns and fnipwrecks, by the SuppoSed death of Weftbury, and his Surprizing reSur-redfion, and by Something dill more wonderful! the intercellion of my gracious uncle ! who, it mud be con-SelSed, does not make love in a very interejiing manner, but Julia was at that moment all tenderneSs, and even his rough manner of pleading found the way to her heart. I oughts to tell you the adventures of Charles, Lord
S
Weftbury, and Selina Courtney, but I will get Some ingenious Scribbling lady to work it into a novel, and them .	■	you
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I05-
«
you will have it all together, which is what you mull never exped from me ; for at preSent I am fo engroffed with, my own affairs, that I cannot write or think of any other fubjed.
T
X
/
I beg you will let me know when you receive /Dh, for I am inclined tO; doubt the reality of every thing; and, am not very clear at this moment whether I do exift or not, and whether I
am dreaming or writing to you; but have a perfed recolledion that Julia told me fhe loved me and onXfme^ Can I have, after this, one wilh left ? Yes, in the midftof all my tranfports, I remember that I have two friends at Drummond-Place,who fhare in all my pleafures, and I wijh that they could be a witnefs of them, and that my felicity could be increased by their prefence.
F 5	The

/
u
Ul
f *1 *
m
li

j:
!i ‘
f
n
■ \ {f
t r
Si

f •
I66 WREATH OF FRIENDShxr.
The Seyiiioiirs have paid their vi~ £t, and MiSs Courtney is Itill with, them, So that I have Julia all to mySelf; you mull ^ pardon me if I repeat her sanie an hundred tinjes over. We \valk, we ride> read, converfe, &c. ^5 the whim of the moment infpires; and look down on the huSy world who-know not- the paffion of love, as on
4
wretched mortals bereaved of heaven V
k
beft gift. Farewel, my dearell mother, I am as much as ever your molt

t

WREATH FRIENDSHIR%
LETTER LXXIL
Mrs, Scudamore:^, toiMrs*
Exeter^ Attgujl' i c^^,
Hkve once more Set my foot oa, Britilh ground, but I have not time, my dearefl friend, to tell you the rapr-tures I experienced on that occafion I-I leave you to guefs what your owa would have been after So many yearsi; abSence. I am Sure your imagination will paint [them much better than my pen, which at prefent muft be emr. ployed on other fubje(51:s,.
I now ft eat a moment: fromi my-reft: to go on with that. Series of wonderful;
adventurejs Ibegan So long, ago, and:
tn
: I
!i :
U •
!t : !M
1
li ;
! i
2 r
:
!!

I 4
ill

i

I
I08 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
■ %
in which you will now become inter-olted as well as mySelf. I hope the melancholy in my hiftory will Soon have an end; and that joy and gladneSs will Succeed to thoSe volumes of mi-fery and Sorrow.
We landed at Falmouth yefterday noon, and proceeded on our journey in two poll chaiSes. In the firft were Orixana and mySelf; Lord Weftbury and Mr. Scudamore followed in the Second.; the road was excellent, and we travelled till Supper time. How eagerly did my eye glance into all the little cottages we palSed, where the happy and contented families were, talking over the labours of the day ;, at lead: my fancy prefented to me thefe. fimple and innocent amufements; the legendary fong caroled by the huf-band, his wife liftening as Ihe repaired
their

'trAZzX
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I09
their Scanty wardrobe, and the chiictreii continually putting a Stop to the whole by their prattle, and their queftions.
The next morning we roSe with the lark, and had gone many miles before the eyes of your fine ladies had thought fit to rival the brightneSs of the Sun. About noon the chaiSe in which my Indian friend and mySelf were, broke down, without any further harm than giving us a trifling fright,- for the delay it was likely to occalion did not QNQnput us out of temper^ fortunately we were near a village, and a black-fmith could eafily Set all to rights again. The gentlemen wanted us ta go forward in their’s, and to fuficr them to wait; but I told them I felt mySelf in a Jlrange country, and would not Separate from my protedlors. The day was fine, and we ftrolled on
by
'M
il*!"
'll"
• u:
lit ' r
i!i;!
'I
I'
!ii
11 • I
il If' I'hi,
« , I
Mci
Mb'
fi
li
b U '
i
I Hi
M
r
I f
j :
Ut ’ :;!!!
1il|
iii
>il
n *«!
i'll
il i
ic 1 •»: i i
Ci
)iii
t i
i ,
!'i ' (
U '
I
'm
ll
Hi
1■ Hi
li'
li
i i
/
ilO WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
by the lide of a park till we came near the village. The place looked delightful, the grounds were Surrounded by young and lux.uriant trees, whoSe boughs hung feathering to the eaith with the weight of their leaves; here
and there openings were made thro’ the plantation to give a tranfient view of the interior part, which was laid out with tafte; and art appeared to have aided nature in her bell manner. My curiofity was raiSed by the uncommon beauty of the Scene. I love lightSi you know, and of this fort I am now become more particularly fond, by having been So long deprived of them. We pointed our fleps to a gate which feemed to open intO; the gardens, a man came out, whom we met and interrogated; he proved to be the gardener, and readily turned back to Ihew •us the place..
It

WREATH OF FR I Fl^TSIf I P. HI
It belonged he Said to a Mr. Dacre^ a fingle man of large fortune, who was at preSent in. London, or he could hot have indulged us with a fight of ther gardens, as it was a favour he never allowed. 1 grew rather delicate of faking the advantage, but the gentlemen over-ruled my Scruples. He firll Ihewed us the fruit garden,,and; treated us with delicious grapes, See. which proved a moil refreflring repaft fo weary travellers. The conServatorv was in the higheft Style of magnificence, and liere we met with many Indian plants, our old acquaintance. Grixana was pofiSefiTed with the idea that the owner mull have lived in India; but the Servant Said no, he was told he never had, tho^ he himSelf did not know much of him, being only juft
come to the place.

i
I 12
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
We rambled, forgetful of the diSafter that brought us here, thro’ groves of tall and beautiful llov/ering Ilirubs, which formed quite a labyrinth; and amongft which, ruftic Seats of moSs and roots were every now and then presenting themSelves. I took notice to our attendant of a bower which terminated the walks; it was Itiii at Some distance, and my feet unuSed to walk did not keep pace with mv mind. He told me it was he believed a bu-rying place, but that was all he knew about it. My curiolity was increaSed, and we hafled on to Satisfy that reftleSs companion. The yew, the cypreSs, and the weeping willow, were the only outward ornaments of this penSive fpot; a Seat of Sods was placed oppo-Site to a Small marble urn on a plain pedeftal, over which the branehes of the trees hung drooping, and around
the
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP I I3
the bottom crept the. melancholy widow wail jufl Ihedding its purple flowers.
My Indian friend hung on my arm, her mind Seemed to catch a tinge from the folemnity of the fcene, and tears trickled down her cheeks. We walked round this monument, and on the fide towards the feat, beheld a fcroll with thefe words.
Sacred to the Memory
O F
\
O R I X A N A
Gracious God! what a difcovery I and what were my fenSations! I in-ftantly turned, hoping my companion had not oblerved the inScription ! but I turned too late! for Ihe fell at my feet deprived of fenfe or motion. The gentlemen had not yet joined us, and
the
I I i
!l
i i
.M
i . i I
!■
" iiiu;
I
ii!
!C
l!ii ‘
Lah >'
'Si
■ii
•bii I
|i!i
i-li

r I ■
'U;
1.' i i
. f »> '
'lilMO I 11 t
'ihlP
ij ii' ■
I
■1!
ii
• I : I ‘
il
■i. Iji
,i: :i {
il
M
U
i :
' t
ill ! ■’ll' >
ii ii
iili! 1:
Til ' iilif.
ii I!
ill
•tu ii !
hjllcti
ch’ii ^ iHhlM
uln i['
«-i r'l- :
It •
nit
:;h

iiM n; 1
-l‘ f
II
*h’ ll ••rill
I I h t
lll li’j I
‘bb!
ilbloi
1(1
8'
;»ui • ♦U’ ‘‘iS-
Ii;'
1 ‘
il!
"It
: >
I i
if
Ih
u
I
il

(>
!»»♦
!li
!li
!!>
i
n
i'll
lb I
t »
iili!

■. t' ' n I Mihil.f
iiiiib


• .'■'{ i’
I'iilil!
10
V ' .'
i I*
Lib 1:
! SL !
i;ii ii
ibiii
if
II4 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
gardener could alone afTiSt me. He
raiSed her from the ground, till Scu-
damore whom I called to, came to my
aid. I thought at that moment She
O
was dead, but he alTured me fhe
breathed, and we Sent the man into the
houSe, to procure Some water, or%me
thing to recover her. A very r
able looking woman Soon came to iis
with hartfhorn and water, and after
rubbing her temples, &c. fhe came a
little to herSelf, and in a few minutes
more fhe had ftrength enough to get to
the houfe, where we relied her on a
fopha, till fhe Ihoiild be again enabled
to purSue her journey.
Tears at laft came to her relief, but
fhe could not fpeak or alk the questions
natural on Such a wonderful event:
and as we had been told the name of
the prefent polTelTor was Dacre, I did
not
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.

not dare to interrogate, left we Ilioiild hear ( what I concluded certainly was the caSe ) that Mr. Wentworth was dead, and this I thought was all that was wanting to conclude the forrows of our dear friend.
Whilft the good houSe-keeper and mySelf were ftanding over Orixana, the two gentlemen walked about the
room
examining the paintings and
drawings which adorned it, many- of which were very fine; the chimney piece was hung in great tafte with a variety of miniatures. Lord Weftbury had not caft his eyes on more than two, when he exclaimed haftily, what do I fee ? Heavens, his the piDure of my SeUna /” The poor Sufferer now found her Speech; fire roSe on her tottering limbs, and cryed, ‘‘ where is it, my
lord ? Does my child yet live then ?
/
or
Ki i
i!
r
1
I
1
t 4
ii
Il6 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
*
or is it a phantom come again to mock me?’^ You will gueSs our aftonilliment!
That Selina, whom Lord Y/eftbury
< •
doated upon, Iliould be tho' long loft daughter of our Indian friend, was an event too miraculous for belief! But the light of the picture blafted all the hopes of poor Orixana, and only tended to increafe her diftreSs! “ Oh no, his not my girl, ftis the well-known picture of Mrs. Wentworth,
that dear lamented faint ! the mother
> •
>
of my hufband, the grandmother of my child ! This is the preSent She Sent us in her laft letter.' Oh, beauti-
t
ful (hade! what loads of Sorrowful remembrance doft thou pour on my too heavy heart. . But every thing convinces me that my hufband has inhabited this Spot. Where is he now ? Is he on earth, or looking down on my afflidion from his heavenly abode?”
Again
WREATH OF FRIENDSfllE.
117
Again Hie was finking into her former Ifiipor, and all our care was Scarce Sufficient to call back her fleeting Spirit hovering between the two worlds.
Lord Weftbur)^, who hung over us in Silent amazement Said 'Then my Selina has not yet found a mother ! • Flattering but delufive hope led me to think this lady^s name might have been Courtney; what joy Should I have had in making Siich a diScovery ! what transports would then have been mine " They are your’s, Sir,’^ Said the houSe-keeper { who with various agitations had been a witneSs of this Scene) " they are the Same; if my faultering voice will but permit me to diScloSe what I know, you will be convinced you have not been miftaken ! Ruin Hares me in the face, but my conscience will not Suffer me any
lon-cer
ill!
. ! I
lb
. > : i
!!!t
I
•!'! i I I 1
iiillll;
i:'
4t
li
I
■h' lisi H '
Ili.’hT ;
MV; '
’ i ■ 5; 1 : i •
!;i: • :h. ; «
ii^i :
!!f!
•; M
ill!!
Ht
u
?n i.
ii^
I
I
itiif 1
'MlO ■bC-f
; I ' !|!<‘
iiii ’•11:
i!l
♦ '
i •
!
'If'Ui ‘
I i‘t
lih- ^
;ill' : iMilL ’
ll:	* t
ii I
.:bi*
jSiiii I
UTt.U »
ll'!:' 1 !
hb'ji ■
te"; :
i|M
; Sllil ;
bi
fiii
m:' ; •hit
i»*

i:i! '

Mb I
JT‘
mu
' I ; »
1 I
11 r <
li i
i i
118
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Ion ger to keep thoSe Secrets that have borne me down, and almoft worn out my life ; and now I pray God, and this good lady, to forgive the fins I have been guilty of, and pardon me, If poiiible, for my Iliare in the guilt! I will tell all, give me but time to recover mySelf from the Ihock and Surprize I have been put into by So unex-peded a circumflance. I hope alfo you will have the goodneSs to protedl me from the reSentment of Mr. Dacre, my mafter, which would be unbounded if he Should know what I am going tore-late. My huSband and mySelf had lived half a year in the Service of Colonel Wentworth, when his lady died, and his Son was Sent for to take his leave of her.Theold gentleman was determined to break the connexion his Son had • made; and for that purpoSe Sent my huS--band to bring away his child.Mr.Charles
Wentworth
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
119
Wentworth had never Seen me, and his father ordered me to Say I was juft come from Cudalore, and had Seen both his wife and daughter expire before my eyes, in violent fevers. His diftraDion ,at this news went to my Very heart, but I was in a foreign country, and quite in a dependent Hate; for we had failed in our endeavours to get an honeft living,and were thus reduced to Serve the purpoSes of others.”
‘^Mr.Wentworrh choSe to return no more to Cudalore, ,and took (hipping for Eiigland as Soon as he was able to take poirefiTion of the cftate which fell to him at his mother’s death, and Which was this very Spot. When he was gone I took charge of the young iady, whom 1 loved as my own child, and brought her with me to England,
when
I2D WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
'i
iu
i‘

when Colonel Wentworth returned. Soon after we arrived, he ordered me to carry her to a School he had choSen for her in London ; there I leSt her byThe name of Selina Courtney. She had on, when flie left Cudalore, a bracelet, which had been given her by
her mother; it was very valuable, and
#
my poor huSband was much inclined
to conceal it; but I would not conSent
to it, and put it in a Small box along
*
with her cloaths, with a paper, fignify-ing it was the remembrance of a loft friend. For, a long time I paid her bills, but was not allowed to See her
— V
left Ihe fliould tempt me by her intreaties to diScloSe the fecret of her birth; and that old Mr. Wentworth, tho^ he always Said he would provide handSomely for her, never intended (he Should know. In a few years
- * .	«	c*
/
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
lai
after we came home my hufband died, for ever tormented by the dings of conscience. I continued to live with Colonel Wentworth. He and his Son were for many years on good terms,, ’till lie propofed to him to marry a great lady with a large fortune, ^ whom Mr. Charles Wentworth would never conSent to fee, and hardly to hear of. This diSpleaSed his father beyond ali bounds; he immediately fent to his nephew, Mr. Dacre, made his will
entirely- m his favour, and intruded him with the charge of MiSs Selina, and her fortune of ten thouSand pounds, to be paid when die was of age. My old mader then went into France to Spend the remainder of his days. At lad he fell into a gradual decline, and began to relent of his harfh
treatment of his Son ; he wrote to him to come over to him, to receive his for-Vol. III.	G	givenefs,
.1)
|h
i
t
!tl
I!
IN u:\]

r i
!l

'r
li
I •
L ii'i
. t r 11 I i

i!l:i
Ihr b I • •
'Llil;

|i.
% i'
f
i:

I

t
iteii
fI.
11®
>!!!
ilill
li
irn
tlM
,ii i i
Kill
lUilii:
: t| i|
lib i
ill"
fb:h
' 1. 11 f
IH
h I •
i 1
iSj!|
' I
Fi|
ij'if
iiil'i
It
I!
I '
'll
!l t
I !
M
li
f
'l!|'
|I5'
:.i I 1.1;
''d- I
,1 't
hi:
* I ;
■I I
• r
M I
h
li;
IZl
WREATH OF FRIENOIHIP,
\
'giveneSs, but we heard nothing' of him ; and months and days paffed 6h, blit he never came. Mr. Dacre always itook charge of theSe letters, and in-‘deed I began to fiiSpedl then that he burnt them allj and that none reached England. At laft I got one Sent away without his knowledge; he obeyed the fummons, but came too late, for my mafter was dead and buried, However he had made another will, and left all his fortune to his Son arid MiSs Selina, with the ten thouSand pounds to his nephew. I mySelf was
V
witneSs to this will, and know that it was fo; but Mr. Dacre proved only the former one, and bribed me to be filent on the fubjedl, faying, when I argued about Mifs Selina, that he would do every thing right by her; and that Mr. Wentworth had epough of his own. Poor Mr. Charles was
much
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 12^
much afflicted to find his father dead, arid I thought returned immediately to England, but nobody has ever heard of him fince; and what has bC'-
^	V
come of him heaven knows. Mr, Dacre Soon took poffeffion of all the riches, and for fome time paid Mift Courtney’s board; but at laft he told me he had removed her from that fehool, and meant Soon to marry her. I often alked him why he did not do So? but he Said Ihe was too young, and always made fome frivolous ex-cuSes, even for three long years; for nis So long, or more, fince Colonel Wentworth died. Laft fummer I had curioSity to go to the fehool to enquire after her, but the houSe was inhabited by new people who knew nothing of her. I hope, fir, ftie lives, as you Seem to know her, and that flic is out of the power of her wicked re-
G 2	lation.*
I
huh
:ihh jC ‘1
• ‘I
IHII
. H
l! I
;!! I
' 1111
:;l 'h .
"• t:
i I
V! , I a. >
•fji ■
'! iii
II • t
'T'!
Pin
;:b:
O' i!
f
ifi
li;;
t '
I I

^i:
ill
!=>
j>!
■ I,
!i!i !
• If >	•

:|l' :<1 : •ij: III
'Hi '

il
I • r
fl
!l
i!
• I
.1
'll
i!	!
ki	:
ii i
! ■ '
Ii t
r I
124 WREATH tiF FRIENDSHIP.
larion.’* “ She does indeed live,Said Lord Weftbury, and has met with noble friends and proteiftors.” This
was the firfl: moment any one had
fpoken but the perfon who related this wonderful ftory^; Orixana exclaimed * ‘ and fhall I then See my child again, whom I have fought for over worlds of water i Receive my acknowledg-
t
ments, gracious heaven ! and if I repine that my bliSs is even yet incomplete, pity the frailty of human nature. But go on, good woman, and finilh this interefting ftory, every word of which finks deep into my heart.” ‘‘ I have told you all. Madam, that I can re-
i
colled:, except that Mr. Dacre took polTeffion of this place about a year ago. Under what pretext I know not, but there was nobody to enquire into his adions. I have told you enough to ruin myfelf, for I muft quit this
houSe
i ►
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 125
houSe diredly; but I have eaSed a loaded confcience, and care not where I go.’V Mr. Scudamore and Lord Weftbury allured her Ihe Ihould never want, and hoped when they called for her evidence in a court of juftice, Ihe
would not refuSe to give it.’' Oh
^	I
no! Sir, I am too glad to make my peace with heaven, if by any means P can do that." On enquiring Ihe told, us Mr. Dacre was at his Houfe in London, where we might find him*.
It was now agreed that Ihe Ihould fettle the houlhold affairs as foon as poffible, and follow us to town, there to confront her wretched mafter.
If this poor woman's confcience has been fo troublefome who has been only an inftrument, what mult his be who was the grand mover of the ma-
G 3
chine h
II
5|
!f» i >
I
ill!
I
. ?
t 1
l !
T-l
I
i
; 1
» •
i ■.
I
i
1
♦
■’ I
M i i
i
n
5 :
Hi'!
! -
!| ! 'll If
1. > { If
I ;
!i
I !
la I I
I (
‘ I
!i;i Hi!
il, r I
illli
ii b
■f| ■ f
i I
f
; c
; I
‘‘Ml
Hi i .111
liill
126 WREATH OT FRIENDSHIP.
Our gentlemen have not yet
fixed on any plan to proceed upon.
They mean to- conSuk connSel in Lon-
don , who will put them into the bell
and readieft method of recovering Se-
lina’s fortune, and punilhing this de-
teftable man.
Our chaifes had been ready Some
time before we once recolleded that
we had any thing to do but to fit and
hear our narrator. When the mind is
cloSely engaged, we never obServe the
lapSe of time which glides away in
filence. Orixana left, with
great reludance, a place where her
hufband had fpent fo many mournful
years, and now Saw the extent of the
treachery that had been made uSe of to
Separate two faithful hearts, objiinatel^
faithful in all their trials.
On
\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I27
On arriving at the carriage we met the Smith who had repaired it. He was one of thofe rough diamonds, whoSe charadfer is Sometimes intereft-ing. I alked him if he remembered Mr, Wentworth who had formerly lived there ? Yes, Madam, my heart mull grow as hard as this col4 iron if 1 could forget him. He was my bell friend, and when all the world took againft me, he paid my debts and Set me up again, I owe my prefen| good living to his charity and advice,’^ ‘‘And is not this gentleman charitable too “He ! God forgive him, I believes as how he does not know how td Spell the word, I never either eat a bit of his bread, tailed his liquor, or faw the colour of his money lince he came. But I begjiour pardon. Madam, for being So free, but you happened to hit the right nail on the head
G 4;
to
li
>! »
\
' t
li . 1
Ill
»'
■Mil
5 > i f
> I •
u
il
fi
»i

1!
i'l
!P
lO
!
i

11
‘•fi»'
fu' I
ill
!!h
iij
< I
i',
I H
) 1 ! »4 111
l!i
\
ii’
ip
lii
iit
i'i
»p
M •' I I 1 ii^
hi
I»
: t
If
!ii
ill
»I
ii'ii
iti’C
5* 11
1 i
I
1
t
li
lii
!
•:r i’ h ih tj ii II'
ii "1
'! iji
1 -T 1
\llr
ht h
l?i-b
f'♦ > «
;;rr ! 11
2 2$ WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP,
/
to Set me a talking; for when once my tongue has named Mr. Wentworth, it never likes to lie ftill.” I gave him a crown for his gratitude, and received
his blefiings to protect me on my
•» •
journey.
Lord Wellbury is writing all this
to his friend. Lady Julia, to diScloSe it
to MiSs Wentworth in the mofl;
0
tender manner. The mother and daughter muft meet as Soon as poS« hble; perhaps you will have the goodneSs to alk Selina to meet us at Wansford, as we are entirely Strangers to her valuable friends.
Mr. Scudamore’s eldeft brother

meets us in London ; your letters will find us at Lothian’s Hotel, Alber-marle-Street; where we intend to re fide while in town. Adieu.—This
'	K
t
t
long
so
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 129
/
long letter has perhaps tired u$ both but the interesting nature of its contents mull be my apology.
Once more adieu,
Emily Scudamore^
LETTER
Mrs. SeymouFi to Mrs. Scudamorf
Wamford.Houfe, Auguji 24.
ELCOME, thrice welcome,, my beloved friend, to your "Dative land, and to your Eliza^ Your t^ laSt letters have beeii fo fraught with wonders,, that we have not yet r^overed our Surprize and joy..
G 5	Thab
I nr •
' f
! I

,i‘!
‘ i 1:
T
i I
i I
fljii -
iii'i'i.
'II ’
V!
!iCj’ '
h! 1‘ I ; 111 !
!il:
if'
jt
I ’
if ! i
i:'

! I
't
I'! !
.i
IS
n
•MU i
li!|t
I* if
! i
*
»' ’
i* i 111! t. :
n
M
lit <
L ■

I J
liN
it I I i 1 » s I
H
* j
; t
ill! jli 1
i! ‘
Il‘-
ito
I
.f! ,
ill
130 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP

That your fliip, my dear Emily, fliould be the means of Saving the life of the amiable Wellbury, and that this cireumftance liioiild So fortunately lead tp a dilcovery fo wonderful, feems; almoft beyond the bounds of proba<-bility ; and we inuft with admiration, contemplate thiat unfeen hand that leads us Safe through fo many, intri-. cate mazes, and brings us.^ at lall tp, peace and Safety.
Your firft letter found us plunged in the'deepeft Sorrow. The lovely Selina was with me at Wansford, and the news-paper report of Lord Weft-bury’s Ihipwreck had reached us ,a few hours before your letter ; but as Sorrow is always unpleaSant, even in the recolleftion, 1 will not diftreSs you and myfelf by recounting what
agonies my friend endured.

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
*3^
At the time I received your agreeable account with the conclufion ( as
%
I hope ) of Mrs. Wentworth’s Sorrows-, Mr. Seymour was gone to Spend the dav with a friend, Selina and I were alone. She begged me to read my letter; I did. My Surprize and: Sympathy for her SufFerings almoll overcame me, and I burft into tears*. Selina, who had Scirce recovered the fhpck She had juft ’ received immediately concluded Weftbury was again in danger. I Soon recolle(fted-mySelf,
4
and endeavoured to calm her fears, but in vain ; unleSs I would allow her. . to know the contents of my letter, Ihelhould never be convinced he w^aa . welh She was afliired,' fhe Said,” I
could have no intelligence that on my own account would give me So much concern; and as I 'had beSGre in--fqrrned her the. letter, was from Mrs.
Scudamore,:
' /
i III
i;i
Ml.l
:»r|| .
'» !
il
1
i:
i'i li
ifi
iN:i
ilj
!ii >
rH

III

m
In'
;!!k
; (
!l
Il ^
:h
il
I
in

ii!
M
li'p
li
Mi!
Hi
Ijflj
lU
f ihj
h'l
l!
I »
»
h

if
i
Wi
I
1
H

ii!
liif!
!,' ill
lli
n;*
lllil
ill
51
i
132
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP?
Studamore, Ihc was convinced that
nothing but Weftbury^s illneSs could
prevent me from Ihewing it to her. I
found it was impoflible to poftpone
the discovery, which I moft earneSdy
wilhed to do, till Mr. Seymour^s re-
turn, as I found mySelf unequal to the
talk j but her apprehenlions were
diftreffing both to herSelf and me. I
told her it was the concluiibn of the
I
ftory of your Indian friend, and that I
would bring her the firSt part, and
then file fliould read my letter. 1 had
before promifed to Shew it to her, but
our anxiety on Lord Weftbury’s ac-
count had prevented me. She Seemed
but half Satisfied with this delay; how-
ever I brought the papers, and file
read them with great attention;, and
a iympathizing tear ftole Softly down
her lovely cheek, I confeSs my feel
ings were almoft more than I: could;
fupprels 3
VVREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
1 n ^
fuppreSs; to See her employed ia
\
reading over the woes of her long loft parents, ignorant that they were Suchr and to hear her melancholy regrets for the fate of Orixana, left, like her-felf, an helplefs orphan, and theix again deprived of her hufband and her infant, when fhe might have flattered herSelf fortune had at laft Smiled upoa her, and would have crowned the remainder of her days with peace and tranquility^ She flopped when fhe came to that part where Mr. Wentworth leaves her at Cudalore, and looking at me withthemoft expref-five countenance. Said, Oh, my dear Mrs. Seymour, how much do I rejoice that I was enabled to withftand my Lord Weftbury’s entreaties to marry him privately.. How many for-rows would poor Orixana have prevented, had fhe trufted to that kind!
pro-.
I
«
1
!i|
jiii
i
i!
it
ii
il
ii

il
i I
lii
H

II
M
n

Ii?
1
ii

ii
1
iltii
I 1?1!
'Hi
‘ P
till

{<{
w

«!!
Ml
!
iHi
134 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
providence which will one day or .other reward every virtuous aftion ?” She proceeded till Ihe came to the bracelet, and Starting oIF her Seat Ihe
cried.
CC
gracious powers! I have a
bracelet!” and then recollecting her-felf, Ihe Said, no! it is impoITible, I never was in India ! I am not So fortu-
%
nate, I have no kind parent to bleSs her Selina ! But my dear Mrs. Seymour, I didrefs you with my ardent wilhes to discover my ever-lamented parents.” ‘‘ Would you, my dear Selina,””Said I;‘‘have wilhed in Mrs. Wentworth
. P
to have found a mother.^” Doubt*
. (
leSs, my dear Madam, I w'ould! could T read a tale of So much Sorrow and not wish it was in my power to alleviate thoSe Sufferings ? But, tell me, has Ihe found her hufband and her child “ She has heard of both, but not yet Seen them.” Allow me then the
♦	-t.	•	^
pleafurc
WREATH OF. FRIENDSHIP, t
’ 0
\
l^lcaSiire. you promiSed me, of readin
the conclufion.” SuppoSe, my dear Selina, we poftpone it till after dinner;
you are tpo much agitated at prefent
•«
to finish Such a tale of wonders.^’"' “ You can form no idea of my' feel-'. ings at this moment, my dear Mrs. Seymoiir, if you think I could* pati-
•	*	• t
ently wait So long for the conclufion of;
«
a flory, every \Yprd of whicli feems ; engraven on my heart.” “ Then take.
•»W
it, my love, but firfl let me warn you . tp fummon all. your fortitude, You .
concerned in the event, than at prefent you fepm able -
are more

to bear!” * She tui ned pale, and fall-; ing on her knees. She faid, gracious heaven! I thank thee, if I have at laft found a parent!” Her voice faultered , and flie feemed almoO: fainting. I r^ifed her from the ground, and again-urg^d her to exert ajl her fortitude, to
fuppor
V
Vi.
hi; !
ill
ill ;
III .
I: ; ‘ >;i I
J •
ll‘ I
.....
I n. j >
h b
f I .
Hi:"
, ii! I
iiii
: t
'll)} , ill i •
Ii! i i
ji!
i!

i
HI
i
ii
i'l I I

.iMi
it
■rB*
1 !
M
it
i!
:ln
I
n*
I; Uf
» ;
• I
i >
{ \
Hi
HiS

1 I
i ; I k
I
» I
if
P
1 ‘
O
iilj
'll!
M'
Ml
: b
!1
if
\\
I
u
o'
m
‘ 01

ililH
tn*
IH
!l
< •
\ '! ‘ 1
IpIi
iHi
■It

‘hn
1’! tjl
!i
136
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Support her on an event of So much
joy. After taking Some drops, and
walking about the room a little, I had
the pleaSure to fee the bloom return
again to her cheeks ; and a flood of
tears that came to her relief. Seemed
to eaSe her almoft burlling heart. In
about half an hour (he was compofed
enough to finilh the narrative, which
Goft her many tears. As Soon as She could
Speak, fhe intreated I would allow her
to go to London, to throw herfelf at
the feet of her long loft parent. I aS-
fured her I would with joy have ac-

companied her to town ; but a little
time was absolutely necefSary to pre-
pare her mother to See her ; and that
I was
very
Sure the moment She was
7
able to bear it, you would attend her
to Wansford.,
Her
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP 13^
Her apprehenlions for the fate of her father feem toengrofs a large Ihare of her heart. If her dear mother Ihouldftill be doomed to fuffer, how fe-verely would Ihe feel. But the fame kind arm which has prote^Sted them through fo many dangers, will not now forfake them.
I have been fo intereded in my Selina’s fufferings, and have Ihared fo fincerely in her joy, that I have not time to defcribe the delight I feel in the profpefl of embracing you fo foon at Wansford. Do not dela^ a moment longer than is necelfary ! confi-der the impatience of my young friend is not to be reftrained.
Tell Mr. Scudamore lhave follow-
edhis advice, and cholen k prote£lor
whom
f 1
i
ilMi

4kli
:|H 1
fl
ifil i
If
IN
»I
\\,

if*
i I n
f I
1
i-.-w il
iil
U
m
^^4
t
I
}-•
.,?iS t
[ )i r
1
il
l!
».
'■ ’ i
•!!!
'1' sr
II
*■1
Ui

il
li|i!
ri
Hi
i
H
K f f

I
!l
138 WREATH CP FRIENDSHIP.
whom I Ihall have a pleaSure in in-
troducing to his friendship. Selina
has attempted to write to her mother,
but her Spirits are at preSent too much
fluttered for her to proceed. Say every
thing that is kind and dutiful for her
and Jiappy is the parent who can boaft
of fuch a child.
YouCs, dear Emily,
Eliza Seymour,
LETTER

] t
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I39
LETTER LXXlV.
Mrs. Scudamore, to Mrs. Seymour.
Lothian*s Hotef Auguji 24.
W

E arrived in town two days ago; but I have never been been able to take up my pen to you till to-night. I have already Seen many of my old friends, who really exprejjed great Satisfadion at my return. I was pleaSed with the compliment, and do hot chooSe to queftion its lincerity ; but I will not fill my paper with un-interefting matter, but proceed ( as you would wish me ) to fubjefts of more importance. '
Mrs,
i |: 5 ! I
i '■	:
T, ■ • -
'■ii
■*: ^ Itr i
}i'‘
j .
:h I i
;ih!.
t;i 1 ;
^!i!
'iiii
I '
I ^ I
liH
iU
lii'
1
h: I
i!l
1
f5ij « r !|l f 1
[li' ' :
i-.D !
I' ^'
Ii! ■
hi! !
fSi
Ijtl
ils
'•i{
■I II
I
I n i'O i;m I
:ii|
fl
!ihi ibi
l^iii
he
11 ■Ii •
f; l! i
III ,
4|i. *
■*f” \ ■
Bf'
■II
i
ii

Iti
iitt'iii
I
ipi
h'li- 5
Ii;'!' ‘
biiiS
c'! I
iiiitii:
ill;
c'!b-
.DA
. \
iibfL.
;‘T|1
gi;
lli
■ L'*'' .
■:Vh ‘Ih iiit
"tT
'UK I

■■.V
140 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Mrs. Wilfon, Mr. Dacre’s houfe-keeper, came to us yefterday. Mr.

Scudamore and Lord Weftbury had already taken the advice of counlel, in what manner it was beft to proceed, to recover the eftate for Mrs. Wentworth. The law people, you may be fure, adviSed vigorous meaSures, in which they themfelves were interefted; but our two peaceable thought it right to try fair means, and to let Mr. Dacre certainly know what they meant to do, Ihould he prove re-fraclory. They waited upon him therefore this morning, at his elegant
I
houSe in Portland-Place. He was Surrounded with a levee of gay young men. Mr, Scudamore told him his bufineSs was of a very particular nature, and delired to Speak with him
m private
He Seemed ftruck with
the requeft, but attended ' them to
his
I i
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I4I
his library, and thqre defired to know the purport of their bufinels. It was to enquire by what rightdie enjoyed
Mr. Wentworth’s eftates ?
(( >
Tis a
very lingular queftion, Sir, but Soon anSwered, by his laft, will.” Then Mr. Wentworth is dead ? Yes, Sir.”
“ Where and when did he die ?” He
$
appeared rather at a loSs, but recollecting himSelf he faid, “ in France,
Sir, about two years ago.” am really
«
fmcerely concerned at this information, becaufe his widow is arrived from India ; and has, by a lingular providence found a daughter She has long been deprived of, and by this distribution of his property they are both deftitute.” I never heard of either of the ladies before; his poffible they may not be impoftors, but moSt probably they are. Whatever they are they cannot difpute a right fo firmly
fixed


H



142 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
fixed as mine.” “You alSo poffefs, I am told. Sir, all Colonel Went-worth's great property by a will?” “ I do Sir.” “ But does not that will make a provision of ten thouSand pounds to a MiSs ^Courtney V It does.” At the mention of MiSs Courtney his confulion viSiblV increaSed, but he told them Ilie had been dead fame time; and fuppoling She was not, had no means of proving heifelf the perSon intended. Did you ever hear of Iiich a wretch ? I have hardly patience to relate to you this conver-fat ion; and am only forry to think that there exills in the world any one fo worthleSs.
I i
Scudamore’s' next queftion was “ if he knew Mrs. WilSon, formerly the houfe-keeper of Colonel Wentworth?” ** I do. Sir, what of her ? and why am
I
Wreath of friehHship. 143
1 catechized in this ftrange manner?’* Tis, becauSe Mrs. WilSon is acquainted with Some family concerns^ in which you, Sir, have borne a principal part; and which have, by a very extraordinary circumflance, only juft -come to light. As I never doubt a gentleman’s honour till I have proved it falSe, So I truft you will have no ob-jedion to be confronted with her on theSe fubjed's,” ‘‘ Indeed I Shall, I know her to be a wretched mercenary woman, who will fay, or do, any thing for money ; and I do no chooSe to put
You
are
iiiyfelf in her power.” already So, Sir; Ihe was, unfortunately for you, a witneSs to the very laft will of Colonel Wentworth, and can prove that his effeds were very differently diSpofed of.” ^‘Prove what you pleaSe, Sir, I Ihall Hand the teftj nor will I be affrighted out of a property I enjoy
from
11
\

M j
Oi

V
I

144 WREATH OF rRIENUSHIP.
/ ^

from indubitable right.’’ The gentle* men endeavoured to reaSon with him
r
I
on the Subjed:, and to convince him,
'that as all was now known, So he had
#
better without further trouble relin-
(
quifh what in juftice he could not detain; and that they could aniwer for the generolity of the ladies, who would not expedt him to refund income he had . already received. They reaSoned with the winds, and were under the diSagrepable neceffity of making ufe of the authority granted them by a magillrate ; ahd of leaving , him under the care qf a civH gentle-
’ man, who carried hi^ power in his
\
pocket. They permitted him to continue in his own houSe ; a favour he very Sullenly accepted.
From Poitland -Place they went to Dodor’s Commons, takins; Mrs. Wil-
fon,
( ,
WREATH OF FRIENDSHST. 145
Son, to examine the wills ; who po«
%
fitively Swore that the Signature to Mr. Charles Wentworth’s was not his own writing. This gives us hope
/
that he may Hill live ; and as fortune
has been So very bountiful lately in
}
her discoveries, that we Cannot help being Sanguine. She alSo Says Colonel Wentworth’s will is that which he
4
made before he went abroad.
Steps
are now taking to oblige Mr. Dacre
t
to be juft; could we aiSo oblige him to Say, where Mr. Wentworth is to be found, we Ihould be ftill more at eaSe. Poor Mrs. Wentworth begs not to be informed of the reSult of their proceedings, till Something final is determined ; as her Spirits are too weak to Support the anxiety the knowledge of them would occafion.
Vol. III.
H
Her
\
11
146 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Her impatience to fee her daughter makes her quite ill, tho’ on our account ( Avho Ihe knows have buSinefs that will detain us Some time without the addition of her’s, tho’ equally in-terelling to us ) Ihe endeavours to hide it. For this reaSon I determine to be with you in a few days, leaving Lionel to follow at his leifure, who I know cannot leave London this fortnight ; and. that would be another eternity of feparation from you, for whom I am the more anxious as.I draw nearer to you. Neither could I think of depriving my friend for So
long a time of ihat exquilite pleaSure
%
Ihe.expects, in beholding her long loll daughter, who is reprefented as fo very amiable; long may they enjoy the felicity which appears to be in flore for them.
Lord
¥
1
WREATH OF rRtENDSHlE. l4^
• r
/
Lord Weftbury leaves us to-mor-row. He will be with his father the Same night, and with you the next day. He may be truly faid to Hy upon the wings of love, for itpoflefSes every feeling of his Soul. He will ex? plain to you all theSe intricate affairs, which I relate So ill;.Dot you mull remember I was not bred to the la'W and make allowances alSo for my head^
t
which is not at preSent very clear. •
V
• Mr. Scudamore’s brother met us here, and while our two gentlemen were Studying law, was my corn-panion, < and obligingly accompanied us to Shops, &c. where we have been attempting to alter our dreSs to the preSent taSte ; that you may not look upon us as Goths when we make our
•appearance at Wansford.
H 2	ISttefday
r'
i
• I
li
I
o.
1!!
■1 it
Mil
li
‘
li ** ! i
i /
l|
!1
148 WREATH or FRiENDSHir.
V ^
Ituefday Mormng*
I have this moment received your kind letter, and have'only time to add to this, that I hope very Soon to embrace you and Selina, and why not your excellent hulband ? whom I come prepared to admire and efteem* Lord Wellbury has juft driven off. Scudamore and Orixana add every kind and good wifti to the Wansford Society^
Ever your’s.
E. S,
LETTER
li
V I
II
\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 149
LETTER LXXV.
!
yIx^%l(Pentw<3rthi to Lady JidtaHarcourt
PVanrfttrd.IIouJi, Auguji 27, OW will the Sympathizing heait oi my Julia, participate in the
many years
of doubt and anxiety, I have at laft found a /' My heart overflows with gratitude even at mentioning a name So tender, So endearing. How true were my conjectures, that the fate of my parents muft have been unhappy ^ MiSerably wretched, indeed, muft my poor mother have pafled her prime, banilhed from all her Soul held
%
dear, and turned out a wandering fugitive. But I S^ak to you my Julia,
H 3	of

150 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
r
t
of myfteries. Mrs. Scudamore’s narrative, which will accompany this letter, will explain to you much better ■ than I can do, the whole (lory. I have been endeavouring, Iince the firft moment I heard it, to give you Some idea of the inexpreffible pleaSure I found in discovering who were my real parents; but hitherto my endeavours have been fruitlefs. Mrs. Seymour’s whole time has been Spent in adls of kindneSs to <me, and attempts to calm my per-
This
morning
I
curbed Spirits.
A •
.thought my Self tolerably compoSed ; •but Iince I Sat down to write I find So
t
many new ideas rupii continually upon .my mind, that I am afraid I Shall ex-preSs myfelf quite in an incoherent, Style.
At this time,, how much do I wifii |or the council and Support of my beloved
t s
Hli
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I51
loved Lady St. Clair ? She has indeed been a parent to me; her prefence would inSpire me with fortitude. 1 make every effort in my power to acquire Sufficient courage and reSolution; but we are every moment in exped-
ation of the arrival of our friends, and
« %
the leaft noiSe deftroys the labour of

hours.
Julia
blame my agitation, when you con-fider my Situation. I have not the leaft trace of my mother in my recol-leffion. I have been educated in a different Style, in a dirtant climate from her. She may have formed a thouSand ideas of her child, which in
9
all probability I Iliall not anSwer. But hence, Such unpleaSant refledlions! I will do all I can to make her life comfortable, and we muSt leave the reft to that power who in fo miraculous a mannei* brought us to the knowledge
H 4
of
/
152 WREATH OF FRIENDSHI P.
of each other. I can. Scarce mcntiou ihe name of Scudamore, without in-
t
yoking a blefling on it. How, in every inftance, has that charming woman adled as my guardian angel, by
preserving thoSe from deftrudion, in y hoSe fate 1 am moil interefted.
I can readily believe how great your dillreSs was on Weftbury's account; but I hope in this as well as in many other cafes, good will refult from evilj as I think it was in Some degree the means of Softening your heart towards poor Drummond, who, notwith-
flanding appearances may have been
« ^
him, is, I am convinced, en-
I
tirely worthy of you. I hope in your next you will tell me, that eveiy thing
.	f
is fettled between you*
You
i ui'
i
WREATH OF FRIINDSHIP. 153
You were a little too abrupt in the conclufion of your lali epiftle ; and tho^ it was very much in your ozatt ftyle, it did not Satisfy the curiofity of your friends. Mrs. Seymour has jud; had a letter from London; Ihe tells me our friends will not be here to day as we expecled, on account of Some bufinefs which detains Mrs. Scudamore in town. How inconlillent is , >
human nature ? Tho* before I Was fluttered and alarmed at the thoughts of their coming, I am now mortified beyond expreffion at this delay; but by way of confolation, fhe fays, Lord Weftbury will be here this evening. You, my friend, know my heart fo well, that you will eafily fuppofe that: piece of intelligence muft give me fenfible delight. I believe it is as well he ihould come firft; he will be able to. anfwer Some of the thouSand questions
H 5


J54 wreath of FRIENDSHIP.
tlons I have to afk about my mother. But I find the thoughts of his coming
I
have So entirely deranged all my ideas,
that I muft for the prefen t lay down
> *
tny pen.

Adieu, my Julia, I Scarce know by what name to call rayfelf; but depend upon it, however fate Ihall diS-pofe of me in this world, I fliall ever
remain, yobr truly affedionate and
* * \
fincere friend,
Selina.
]>
LETTER
. \
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I55
LETTER LXXVI.
Lord hVeJihury,\.o Henry L>rummGnd^{<\..
Wansford-Houfe,■ Auguji a8..
OU, my dear Drummond, who, are So really and So honourably in love, will eafily imagine the transports I felt at the fight of my Selina*. After an abSence fo painfuly Ihe re-, ceived me with, tears of joy. Above.-the little arts and affeDations of her fex, Ihe was not afraid to owni to me; how much. pleaSure my return gave her; and to acknowledge how fevere-ly file fulfered at the time when I w'as; fuppofed to have found a watry grave.. Sad alternative, to the gentle boSom, which now offers me repoSci I arrived here ( as you would imagine from the-hour in which. I parted from you) not. till very late; but at this houSe there are no difficulties, and the exoedation of' a friend drove Sleep and laffitude far
t
I am delighted with Mr.. Sey-
W
nipur^,
I!
I
11 ■ ill
u t
n \
IS
1 , %
, *
iM
:t ’
) ,
!ii
ill
I!
'Ill 1 .
:j V
It
11!
Ill
ti
III
f •
ii'
T
\i
li
Ml
I
lb

d:
11
I-
hi
X56
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
^ broad day light ere
mour, who'l'c reception of me was kind
and flattering ; and his lady is all be-
%
nevolencc. Every one had So much to afkj'^d I So much to communicate,
we retired to reft ; and his now, I am alhamed to fay, almoft one and we are only juft riSen from break-faft. I have been writing to my father, and'while the pen is ftill in my hand, dedicate a few moments to you. Be very grateful for this favour, for I fteal the moments given to you from the Society of her I love beft. She is now in the garden with Mrs.Seymour, in a ftate of the moft anxious foli-ciaadoi This very evening.Mrs. Scudamore and Mrs. Wentworth are ex-pefted ; all; our endeavours are neceS-fary to Support my Selina on this awful, but wiflied-for occaSion. I will clofe my letter till to-morrow morning.
' /
-
ih
I"
U!

.s
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
^5f
that I may give you Some account of their meeting. ,
In the midft of all
t Night.
njoyments
I lament that you, my dear Drummond, and our Sympathizing friends at the Abbey, cannot be witnelTes of the happineSs which has been bellowed on the party at Wansford. I cannot fay, pure as it is, that there is no alloy, for where on eaith can it be found quite perfeifl ? Mr. Wentworth is Hill wanting to fill up the meaSure of our bliSs; the cloud that hangs over his fate is Hill dark and obScure ; and I fear that time, which diScovers fo many wonders, wdil fail to enlighten this fide of our profpe6l.
The mother and the daughter have met! Heavens! what a meeting ! and
how

1 c8 WREATH OF FRIENDSH IP.

how unequal is my pen to a description oS it! But I know Lady Julia will not forgive me if I paSs over in lilehce a circumftance So interefting, and which her lovely friend is too much an a61:or into be a narrator. / wilhtherefore
t
attempt the talk, premifing, that her fair Ladyfliip mull take the will for the deed ! and not expert a finilhed pidure from a trembling hand.
At dinner I obServed that Selina had drefled herSelf with more than common care, but fimple and unadorned ; except, that on her arm Ihe wore that bracelet, the preSent of a parent wdiom Ihe longed, yet half-feared, to. meet. So diffident is Ihe of her own perfedions, that her anxiety, lead; Ilie Iliould in her manners or appearance disappoint her fond expeding iijpther, have been painful, to herfelfj
and
.(
kl

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
arid even to her friends, v:ho can have
no doubts on this Subjed.
Dinner over, the day began to wear
fall away. As the hour of expedation
approached, Selina grew Hill more
anxious. ReftleSs, and forever at the;
window, her eye Ilretching to its ut-
moil extent, and Hill bringing her
heart no intelligence, I propoSed that
we Ihould walk down the avenue;
perhaps we might meet them. She
Seized with avidity my propofal, and
we walked fometimes with a quick.
fometimes a flow Hep, till we reached
the lodge. My tongue, prompted by
my heart, forever recurs to that fond
fubjed her preSence -always inSpires,
but for once it wasirkfome. CeaSe,
Weflbury,” Said the dear girl.
((
to-
day, I cannot liften to tales of love !
duty and reverence take foie poffeHioii;
of

ifii
i
it !
:mi I
iili
iU i I
‘i
t*
' 3
! f
1
»' i- i
f
i 1
I:
i i;
uli
Hi
; «i
t
I

i
1! ; t
hi
1
!
u

ilE
W(
r
x6o wreath' OF FRIENDSHIP
of my mind ; that once more fettled,* we will plan fcheiDes of future hap-pinefs, and forget all our pad miS-fortunes. But wdiere does my fancy ramble ? Wc will not forget, but remember them to make us humble, and to remind us that we are mortal, and ftili liable to error and to Sorrow.'^
IS.

Arrived at the high road, we heard no found of carriages; and returning a few paces back “No,^’ .Lid Selina, “ we will proceed; my mother will be pieafed with my impatience, but (he can never know to what an excels it
4
At lait the found of wheels flruck our ears; it was at a diftance, but certain. Selina could hardly (land. Supported awhile by my arm She recovered her resolution; the carriage cameinlighti Mrs. Scudamore faw us from the front window^, and had
op ened
1 •
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIB
l6l
opened the door of the coach by the time it came up with us.
y
Mrs. Wentworth gave ^ Scream of joy; in a moment her daughter was. in her arms; but they could neither Support themSelves or each other; and would have Sunk to the ground, had not we, the Spe<5tators of tliia moving Scene, afSiIled. It was Some minutes before either found their Speech. At laft, Mrs. Wentworth, in faultering accents Said, “Yes, thou art my own Selina ! d ear image of the bell of men„ thou neededft not that pledge of love on thy arm to convince me of my hap-pineSs! Every feature is thy father^s, foftened by graces truly feminine. Oh ! my Lord, I thought your pidure had been too flattering ? but it hardly comes up to the original, ftrongly as you colour!” Selina was much
agitated.
ii!
;'
I < I
I r
:: \
l;{ii
|li I >
., 11 . !i I
. I i ; I t
M ■ I
, 1 I
•bC
li-'i
lii '
i|
ii
I
i!i
. > ‘ ii ii
\
I i
1
ii I
I
i
I
I
162 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
agitated.
The ladies returned into the coach, and I followed the happy party on foot. We had again another joyful meeting to w'itneSs between the two friends, and many tears were Hied in their fond embrace. Mr. Scudamore was prevented by buIineSs attending the ladies, but is to follow them in a few days.
Farewel, my dear Henry ; to-morrow I hope to fix a time for my approaching happineSs. When Shall I congratulate you on a fi milar event ? My beft love to Lady Julia, tell her how I long to call her by your name, and to thank her for beftowing felicity
on my friend.
IVefthury.
LETTER
WREATHOF FRIENDSHIP
163
LETTER LXXVII.
Lady JuUaHar court, to yii(%fVent worth
OW
Livlngfion-Abbeyy Auguji 31,
my beloved friend, in thinking that your Julia would Sympathize with you in all your cares and anxieties. You cannot be Senfible of a pain, but I find equal uneafinefs; and not one chord of your heart is attuned to joy which does not convey the mod lively plea-fure to my own. How thankful am I that your firft interview with your mother is over ! You will, now, I hope, be more calm and compofed than you pofiibly could be before you
bad Seen her. Lord VVeftbury*s let-
I'f !
'■1 ' u' :
i:i;
‘ t
iii'
;i ’
■	• I
■	r ■
(i! ; '■It
■ I J
': :
t: .
i i I 11 ' . I
i) :
; » I
o i
ij ;
' > I
1 i
'' . 11 • 1
'■' t
I :
n
} I
! •
i'
I-:
iiii
I' ; ■
i;!
Hi'
k:
'M ;
liij
!|!
L!
Ii‘ I
' I
:!!il
lilt
,' c I
Ci
i i
■mC
i I
■■lii
i
t I
1n
ii;
i k I
it>
ih
lilii!
'Im ; • •■I-	1
I'l 11 >
’i!! • '
' I
•V r f
‘ I* * .
fA l!
I!
<!i
T 5
I	'
164 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIF.
ter relieved us from a world of anxiety-
on your account
It was indeed a
trying occaiion for your fortitude; to meet with a parent who had undergone Such a variety of adverfe fortune. But how thankful muft her heart be to that power, who has preferved her child ; and who, after being fnatched firom her in the moll cruel manner by a mercileSs tyrant, is reftored to her again in all the lovelineSs of youth and virtue; free from the vices and corruptions of a frail world, to which Ihe was expoSed a helplefs innocent, without one kind hand to guide her inexperienced fteps
I
My father defires me to tell you, tho* you have found other parents,
you Hill remain his child ; and that he
/
cannot conSent on any account that Lord Weftbury Ihall receive you from
any
ii
I!:
wreath OT FRIENDSHIP. l6
h
any hand but his; on which coniider-ation, as the marriage ad is the parent of delay, he wilhes the whole party from Wansford to repair toLivingdon-Abbey immediately. You know, Selina, my Lord St. Clair loves to have every thing done in his own way, and I believe in this cafe does not ex-ped to meet with any contradiction.
I muft confefs I am particularly
/ ♦
anxious for your arrilral. I have wilbed for your Society very much lately, and am extremely defirous of being introduced to Mrs. Wentworth, Our party wi!H not be half comi>lete without the Seymours and Scudamores accompany you; but I ihall write to Eliza on the fubjed.
You would ;be quire
if
youSaw ]tiom peaceably -we pafs our
time
!
I'
r-\
ir
t
li
!i
i!
I ;
; i
H!
!i
r • I •
i66
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIF.
time here; you never met with two people more transformed than Drum* mond and mySelf; we make love in as quiet, calm, and compoSed a way, as any pair of turtle doves in the country.. The name of MademoiSelie de Sanzey never efcapes our lips ; and w^e Scarce know wfiat a quarrel is. As men are always encroaching, he has lately been very importunate with me to haften his happineSs, as he caM ic; but you know, Selina, that remains to be proved ; and may turn out very different from w'hat he eji;pe<51s. But, howTver, I have to far relented, as to promife to give him my hand on the day you beftow ycur’s on Weftbury; which, I think, may be of Some Service to us both, as we may take you for an example, which may be much wanted by two Such giddy brain's as our’s. I
T
am very doubtful what kind of figure
.we
I
wreath UF FRIENDSHIP. 167
wefhall make in the great world; we muft do as well as we can, leave the red to time and chance.
but
and
Sir Henry and Lady .Drummond are expedted very Soon at Lord Mord-ington’s; the gentlemen, to talk about Settlements, and the ladies about dreSs, I SuppoSe, and Such ridiculous things ; but I am reSolved for my lhare, not to give my Self the lead concern about them, they may all take their own way.
We had a vifit yederday from Sir Horace Wynn, I believe he enjoys my confufion more than any earthly thinrr. Tho’ there was more com-paiiy in the room, he could not refrain complimenting H. D. as he calls him, on the imorovemenc in his foirirs,
A	'
is a very happy tiling/^ Said he, ‘‘that
liule
I
I
! i .:
li t
f
I
» i
ti
! i
iii
I i
i6g
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
little mischievous dog Cupid choSe to fend Some of his Ihafts in another,di-reDion, and let the lady feel the fmart a little; it Seems to have made a very agreeable change in the face of things here. H. D. is no more the Sighing difconfolate fwain he was, but the happy contented lover. But do not blufli, my good Lady Julia, you arc quite right, depend upon it;
“ Youth’s the feafon made for joy, Love is then a duty.”
“ Do not be afraid Ilie will hurt her*
^ Said
I^ord Mordington, who^.was Seated, very Surly, in a corner of the room, *'* it is a fare qualification now to be met with in a lady of quality; the modern fyftem of education has totally exploded it; there is Scarce one .of them that has grace enough left to
blufh for a Sauk when fhe has committed
Self with blulhing. Sir Horace,
!i
t
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
mitted k.” Oh, my Lord,” faid Sir Horace, a lady of quality cannot commit a fault; they are all delicacy

and perfection.” “Hum!” faid Lord Mordington, ^hf thofe are your Sentiments, we differ widely, for I think they are never out of one.” As his Lordihip did not feem in harmony to be trifled with. Sir Horace very wifely did not attempt to anfwer him.
I am afraid from this Specimen yoia will not think Lord Mordington im* proved in his temper. To fay the* tmth, he has been a little inclined tqi relapfe lately. You know it was im* poflible'he ‘fhould become quite good all at once; but I have hopej when he fees his fon fo happy, it will have a good effedt upon him. That we may all have that Iktisfadtion Soon; is the earnefl wifh of your
Vol. Ill, J ^ulia HarcQorU
I'i;
V; t ■ , ‘ ; »


ijlc
M‘||
,il 1 ‘I M
il!
: 1 i}
».D ' j
. • I
»'
! 1
I ill
M • '
i!;;l
(1 .
» ' :
!• : If I
!( '
i 1
1.
ii
!f
if
j
ii
%
ill
'i
nf
in
itj
iU
‘i ■
i’t
. I I
!i I
Ii!
li ' ) •
i'i
I ;
iii
J
:• I
; I
ill
iii
'ii
iii
I
i
ii
!b
ill
K-
!:
'i
1 !
» I
II
li!
I r •
; 5 I
'. t	I

I
I
lit
lit
i»;
ii
M
ii;
f
I
lyo, WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP,
LETTER LXXVIII.
JIfn)y Drummond., ESq. to the Rev.
Edward Seymour.
FTejlhury-Lodge, September 5.
UR friends have arrived without
JP
you; yet I flili have hope, you will not refufe, my dear Seymour, to
/
come and complete the happiheSsof your friends. You are never deaf to the call of friendship, haften then, with
your dear ^^partner, to this houSe of
\
joy; where you will fee every face drefled in Smiles, and even Lord Mordington in good humour. What can I fay more to tempt you ? Even this 1 think will be unnecelfary, for I know the proneneSs of your diSpo^ fition to confer all the happineSs within your power. The lixteenth is the day fixed upon; Wellbury and I have petitioned hard for an earlier day, but our old Lords, and my father aflure us,
that
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
that the writings cannot be finilhed,
/
and that every thing mull be done in order. How dull and tedious are theSe law people; and how unlike lovers muft they feel, to whom a day that Hands between them and happi»* neSs is an eternity.
My father and mother arrived three days ago; they met Lord and Lady St. Clair the next, morning, to fettle
preliminaries. My Julia and I, per-
fedly indifferent about any fettlement hut that of the heart, Hole out and left
them to pleaSe themfelves. On our return ( the conference not having broken up ) Lord St. Clair alked u$ where we intended to live ? “ for I declare, young' folks, I will have no-
thing
to do with you


Nor
I,” Said my father. 1 turjaed to Lady Julia, tis a lubject I believe
I 2
we

I '
'I •
r:
II !•
V
! i
t 1
■ 1
11
M'
in ’

lii
! !
1 I
« I
I
172 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
we have neither of us thought upon. As for mySelf
“ Place me where never Summer breeze^
4
Unbinds the glebe or fans the trees.
** Where ever lowering clouds appear And angry Jove deforms th’inclement year.
** Place me beneath the burning ray Where rolls the rapid car of day,
“L ove and the nymph Ihall charm my
toils
The nymph who Sweetly Speaks, and
Sweetly Smiles.
f9
‘‘Very prettily applied, Harry, faid my father, “ but I wilh you to chooSe Some more temperate climate; what think you of my eftate in Here* fordihire ? whilft you remain lovers
it will be a pleaSant retreat.’* “ And if you wifh to join the great world,” faid Lord St. Clair, “ my houSe in St. Janxes’s-Square is much at your Service.

eli
I
WRBATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I|3
vice. When Julia is diSpoSed of I have no longer any uSe for it. My Joan and I can perhaps find entertain* inent enough at Livingfton; and when we grow dull we will vifit the young folks.” I looked at my fair arbitreSs for her determination, “ I admire He-rcfordlhire,” Said fhe, of all things, and as to the houSe in town we will go there when we are tired of each other’s
Society.

Thus was the knotty point
fettled at once; and we Ihall be happy to Iliew you the Herefordlliire Lions any time three months hence. We are to Spend one month after our marriage here; another at Dfummond-Place; and a third with Weftbury and his Selina, who fettle at theLodge; and-Lord Mordington Spends the winter at Bath.
I 3
Whit
i!
1 ’
I
M
i
f
ii i
M
I i
t :
!l
• i
!
i
i I
- i
it
f i
4
i •
r *
li
\ 1
» ;
I i
i ’
t »
k .
. I
i!
• 1
!
* ; t ;
. i i 1
i \ ‘ t i i
f ’
Ei;
:c
* j !;
i,
![!
174 WREATH OF FRiINDSHif.
What fliall I tell you more of our affairs ? only, that Mr. Scudamore and Weftbury have had letters from town, which fay Mr. Dacre will come to no terms, and in confequence of that a Bill in Chancery is immediately
V
to be filed. At preSent we do not let any thing fo tirefome employ om* thoughts, and the lawyers do juft as they pleafe; while we go hand iri hand with the fports, the loves, and
the graces, and every hour gives fome
\
additional proofs of merit and affedion. We live but to love ! Come diredly, and witnefs our felicity.
H. P.
IS
.
LETl'LR
I r
' i I
■li
I.
It
it;
5
ii i
WREATH-OF FRIENDSHIP. I 75
LETTER LXXIX.
KQY.KSeyMmtr, to Lady JuliaHarcourt,
jVmsford-Hmfey September 7. , you admit an intruder
into your preSence, my ever amiable Lady Julia ? I have much to hope from the goodnefs of your dif-pofition, and yet I feel unwilling ta rilk your difpleafure.> I
am
foher parfo
fore ought not to	accufed of flattery;
and yet were I only in plain unembel-lilhed language to tell you how very much I admire your understanding and your lovely perfon, I fear I fhouid not efcape cenSure., But to prove, much as I admire your beauty and wit, I think your fweet temper exceeds them both, I am going to put it to a ftrong trial.
14
Y our
1!;.-
t i
• > 1 I « I
I ■
ii i
4 4
Hi
lii
Si :
ii ^
:h
111
ii ?
:r
If,
I;
!: ) ■
11 . I j
li
i!
i! i
[i{ I
ih-
f! . Mi
i!*
fil
I
O I •
'0
1.
o .
[N
1 ’ ■ •
j * i
{
(■'
. t , I (
10
•H •

h»{
il'
1 •
hi
111
'1! ■ ■
'Uv !
** j • :
lib: ;
ill;!
■
I
‘■5-t .
•tuf i
bb] ;
A u il i H
ii'ii ;•
bi'-
iiii i
ili i tei
I hOl
I! I
ili
b
t;
176 WREATH OF FR IINDSHLT.
Your Eliza, you kno7Vy is my wife; and without her I know by experience, every hour would be dark, and each gay Scene be turned into melancholy. Will you then forgive me, w'hen I Say, I cannot accept of Lord St. Clair’s obliging invitation; nor can I have tlie Supreme felicity of bellowing your Ladylhip^s fair hand on my friend, Believe me the mortification falls hea-vieft on myfelf, as the firft: pleafure this world can now give me, is making my Eliza happy ; and I am fenSible how much fiie would have rejoiced in once mcMre embracing her dear Lady Julia Harcourt. But I am Sure you will cxcufeme, when you know thecaufe. Mr. Watfon has had a letter, with an account tliat his father was on his death bed; he and his wife fet off immediately to fee him. The diftance is above two hundred miles, therefore I
do
b|i
ti L'/ f M .
; [
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP 17,7
do not expert them back under a; month, and’ long before that time you will, have made Drummond as happy as my friendlhip could wifh;him to be., I have undertaken the care: of the parilh in hisabSence, and alSo-of two young gentlemen who are placed with* Mr. WatSon, and whofe friends he was afraid of offending, by leaving them without their conlent. As, I had no,-^ thing to prevent me at that time, I readily promiSed to aflift the young gentlemen in purSuing their ftudies; and at the fame time Eliza promiSed Mrs. WatSon her little ones- fhould find no want of a mother in her abSence. TheSe weighty charges have not been left to> Qur care above, a.week L am Sure your Ladyfhip will agree.witte me, it. is cowardly to deSert. our pofts, parr ticularly as: they were., of our own. choofins:.

r 5s

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP

I have taken Some pains to convince you, my dear Lady Julia, that we,. LOU- not, with, propriety, at preSent. leave Wansford ; but like an experi-cnced lawyer, I have pleaded on both Sides the queftion, and have endea?-voured to perSuade your friend to atr tend you at Livingftoii'Abbey.. Whether eloquence mull flow entirely from the heart tq beat all times fuc-cefsful I cannot now determine, but I' am fure mine was all exerted in vain;
JH
and what is very uncommon, I in my o\yn defeat..
I promised Eliza I would do all in?
my power to plead for pardon froni; you; this one argument more I will; uSe, that every Sentence contained in^ this paper comes from the heart of your. Ladylhip’s moll devoted
Et Seyrnour,-.
WREATH OF ERIENDSHIP
179
LEATTEIt LXXX.
Lady JFUaMarcouni to Mrs. Seymour*.
f	*	‘
Livingtion~Abbeyy . September i o*-
AM now well convinced, that no Situation in this life is exempt from mortification, or I Ihould not.at » this time," when : every , other happinefs Smiles around, have been deprived of. the Society of my beloved Eliza; and ■ what is ft] 11 more diflreflin g, y our rea-. fon for refufing our requeft is fo vci-y
commendable, that I cannot even have, the fatisfaDion oirepfimanding jou for it. Tell Mr. Seymour, I think mySelf' much obliged to . him for his polite , letter, which I ftiU have the ■ grace. to thank him for;: notwithstanding the contents were/o little confonant to my.
You willjeafiiy believe^ hbw much joy the arrival of our friends has. caufed
in
t • V
'*V
S.
it
M-
‘ t
I
• i
|>L
:u
i> f
r r
I
}j*
Hi
i!
i
ll
• »
0
: )■ f tt
ii!
h' ^
1	,
ii
ii
b!
’ '■ i*
WREATH OP FRIEHDSHlRiL
in this habitation. How much was I
ftftbnifhed in the appearance of Mrs.. Wentworth ?. Although you had men-(ioned her to me in terms highly fa» vourable ; yet I'own. from the peculi-trity of her birth and edtication, Idid not expe(^ to find her fo elegant and JK:compliIhed as in reality Ihe is. Mrs.. Scudamore is an excellent little,, wo man, Ihe Seems fo happy, fo contented^ and appears to- enjoy hcrfelf fo mucte in the idea iOf being once more in her. native country,. that it is a treat to me to pafs my time with her. Drummonds and Ihe are very great friends,;, he has-, jtift called to drive, her out in his phaeton.. She was laft night exprefling her admiration of the Englilh pea-fkntry; after being ' ufed to the oppref* fion of the Eafi, flie Said it^ was a cor--dial to hen Spirits tOi fee them*. Drum--mpnd faidjTfflie had fo much plea?
furt:-
\
WREATH G^F FRIENDSHI
* •


fiire in feeing the Englilh peaSants ia; general, he would, i£ agreeable* to her>; introduce her to a. race o£ happy morr tals, who liad’the honour, of claiming
Lady St, Clair as their benefadreSs;;
✓ >
die fight of whom he was Sure, wmuldi delight her. beyond exprefifion. Shet readily accepted of his propoSal; it hadi long been. Scudamore’s wilh and her’s; to eftablilh a Set of happy people abour them, and She now hoped if Ihe took. Lady St,. Clair for her model. She;
fiiould be able to put her plan in
execution.. They are. now, gone upon a round of vifits in the neighbourr hood, frorn. which I am Sure She, will return,much pleaSed with my mother’s management.,
Lord Mordington has behaved upon
this occafion better than we could
a
sdmoftLave hoped. Mr. Prummond
lil i
iO
iii;
li'
■!l
* ' i I
H ;
' ■ i
ii!
h
*
I i
1*8'2 wreath of friendship.
tiiought it neceffary to acquaint him with the whole of Mrs,. Wentworth’s ftory, before She came, and therefore-took an opportunity to do fo when he was Supping with us a few evenings before.. He did not relilh it at all; he-could fcarcely conceal his Sentiments feyeral; times-; at laft,, when it was^ quite finilhed, “ I am-extremely Sorry, for what you’tell me, Henry,” Said he,, ‘‘ I do not care who her parents had-been, had they only been lionefl; and' Englifh;butl have-a national prejudice againll foreigners. I cannot- endure the thought of my Son’s marrying any. but an Englifli v/oman, tho’ Ihe was
descended from an Indian PrinceSs. It hurt my feelings extremely, even the thoughts of your bringing a French
woman into

IS much
worfe; and then her own grand* ijiQfbcr having burnt hcrfelf! ^ there is
WRE AT H OF FRI E N DSHI P.	I'S
§)mething So fhocking and pagan im the idea, I cannot bear it. No, no, I believe the beft way will be to break,, off the connexion, at once, and let us. hear no more of it.” ‘ ‘ Hold there, my Lord,,” Said, my father, ‘^you mute give me leave to interfere in that points.
word
Weftbury
■••V
ight to retract a promiSe made to . Since then, their union is in--evitable, let me intreat you not to. break in upon your Son’s happinefs by; any refledion uponSelina or her friends®. She is a charming girl, and I will an-fiver for it will make him happier than, any other woman> tho’ you had fought round the world for a wife for him.”

‘‘ There now, my Lord ,Sti Clair, faid Lord Mordington^ “ you are always fo paffionate, So, violently paf-
fionat®
'N
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
fionate and hafty, there is no dealing with you ; let them marry, with all nay heart, and make the bell of itbut k is very hard I cannot Speak my own. Sentiments of it to a neighbour, without being Snapped up in. that manner. But I fancy you are afraid, for the,, peace of your child, as you call her;, and to tell you the truth, my Lord, I have had my fuSpicions that She was-y;our childm a more literal lenSc than; you wilhed to acknowledge her; but i find I am miftaken, as many wiSer; men than my Self have, been,
yy
______ \
From this .prelude we had: nO' great
reaSon to think he would acquit him-
felf well when Mrs,,Wentworth earner
but however he came to dinner yeS-
terday with Sir Henry and Lady
Prummond, and behaved with great
^Qlitenefs.and attention to Mrs, Went-
worth.;;
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP, 185
worth; talked to her of the connexion that was likely to take place between LordWeftbury and her daughter; Said he intended to give up Welfbury-Lodge to them, and requelled we would all dine with him the next day, that they might determine if any alterations were neceflary to be made. I was absolutely allonilhed, and believe I fhould Scarcely have given credit to my fenSes, had I not been well convinced it was Lady Drummond^s influence over him that had wrought this-wonderful change. She isaverySenfible woman, and the only perSon breathing -that can in the lead controul Lord Mordington’s impetuous Spirit. He acknowledged to me in the courSe of the
4	*
day, that he thought there wasfome-thing particularly pleafing and interefl;-ing in Mrs. Wentworth’s perSon and maniiers; he was Sorry Ihe had Suffered So-
much

l86 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIF.
*
much, but it was no wonder, for ther^ was not So black a crime on the face
ft
of the earth as difobedience. I have fuffered this noble Lord and his concerns to occupy my pen fo long, that 1 had almoft forgotten a promiSe I made Selina, of apologizing to you for her not writing to day. I went into her drefling room juft before I fat down to write I if ypu are not particularly engaged, there is a Ih ip-wrecked ma^-riner upon the terrace waiting for you, who Says he has a few words to communicate of the utmoft con Sequence to your future happineSs and tranquility.” AIhip-wrecked mariner! Julia, good heavens! what can he want v/ith me, what fliall I do dov/n by all means, but do not, my ood friend, alarm yourfelf fo much ; it is only WeStbury, who wiflies to hand you, to the arbour where of late
you
/
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I§7
you have experienced So many doubts
' and uncertainties, that you may now
enjoy the opening proSpedl of felicity
that is before you/^ “'You have the
the ftrangeft way of doing even the
moll common things, my Julia ; you
really terrified me; 1 have So Strong
an idea that my father is yet alive, and
if that Should be the cafe, who can tell
to what miserable ftate he may be re-
duced ? But I cannot now go down to
Weftbury ; I am going to make 'my
acknowledgments to my beloved Mrs
Seymour, for her many a6ts of kind-
neSs to me, and I cannot longer de-
lay ; nay, I reflect upon mySelf for
defering it So long.” ^.Do not tell me
of acknowledgments, I will undertake
to make them all for you in a trice.
9
I will try you by a court martial of
my own ideas, and engage to have
you honourably acquitted; do- not
V
• \
188 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
you know I am generaliffimo of all the troops here, and that my power even extends to you poor centinal that is at preSent ftationed at Wansford-Houfe. Alons! ma petite! no more Scruples I beSeech you.”

i '.v"
With Some difficulty I perSiiaded her to go; and you See what an admirable counfel flie had given her cauSe to, when I had almoft forgot to men-
# V
tion it; but I know my Eliza feels as
_ \
I do upon this occafion, and takes too much pleaSure in knowing Selina happy,to make an apology neceffiary. Poor girl! it is really a misfortune to have too feeling a heart; for even at this time of feftivity I am certain She fuf-fers many an anxious hour in the idea of what her father’s lituation may probably be,^ It is a great pity Mrs. Wentworth and flie
cannot bring
them-
WREATH OF FRIEi^DSHIP. 189
thetnSelves to think that he has long Since been numbered with the dead.
We are going to dine at Lord Mordington’s, and I have Scarce left my Self time to adorn my perfon, or in the common phraze to dreSs, which you will allow is a great omiffion now, when lam upon my preferment. To redify it as quickly as poffible, I muft at this moment declare myfelf with real fmcerity, your very affedionate
JuUa Harcouri,
LETTER
LXXX.
MiSs Wentworthj to Mrs. Seymour.
Living Jim-Ail ey^ September 11.
4
T
HO’ my ever lively Julia both prevented my writing, and made my apology yefterday, I cannot longer excufe myfelf from fending a few
words
II
. f
i i
, I
i:
: i
I
I
,!
!i
li
190
WREATH or FRIENDSHIP.
words to thank my beloved Mrs. Seymour for her many ads of friendfhip and kindnefs to me. Believe me, they
are written in indelible, charaders on
%
my heart, which time can neither weaken nor efface.
%
w
We are here placed in the happiell fituation; yet even here a figh will fometimes intrude. I fee a cloud hang Over my mother^s brow, which, tho’ fhe takes all poflible pains to conceal it, cannot eScapemy obfervation ; and the certainty of what one parent has fuffered, makes me apprehenfive that the other may be Struggling under a fate no lefs fevere. But I do all in my power to banifh refiedions fo painful. I have So manv reafons to be thankful, that it would be the height of ingratitude to fuffer one care to deStroy my peace, when every other bkfling courts
my
• I
M '
lil
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I9I
my attention ; and indeed. Weft bury feels So acutely for every pain of mine, that on his account I endeavour to fuppreSs. every anxious thought. The kindneSs of every individual here to my dearefl: mother, is, you will imagine, a Source of great joy to me; their affeftidn to us is, indeed, unbounded.
c
We dined yefterday at LorTMord-mgton’s, he behaved as Julia fays, wonderfully well;” indeed. Lady Drummond would make any party agreeable ; fhe is one of the moft ac-complilhed women I ever met with. She is quite delighted with Julia ; and fays, that flie did not think there had been any woman fo well calculated to (hake Drummond happy. There is a quicknefs in her' manner, fhe ob-ferved, that keeps up his attention;
and
IQZ-
WREATH OP FRIENDSHIP,
and file never before Saw livelineSs and
I
fenSibility fo happpily blended together. Her partiality to Julia of courfe makes her a great favourite with Lord and Lady St. Clair, fo that I hope, upon the whole, it is a connexion to bellow happineSs on all parties concerned.

It was a matter of debate after dinner yefterday, whether Mr, Drummond Should or Should not folicit to be made a Peer. Sir Henry Drummond Said he would bellow a fortune upon his Son that would Support a title with brilliancy and Splendour; Lord St. Clair looked as if it would be a gratification to him; but did not fay much upon the fubjedl. Julia was Ilrenuoiis againft it; Ihe would rather have him plain Mr. Drummond than any thing
clfe in the world,. “ Thank you, my
dear
WREATH of tRIENDSfilP
ctear Lady Julia,” Said Drummond,
“ but Surely I was not fo vain of m]?' beauty that you need to have taken this public opportunity of humbling me, by informing the company tliat you did not think rh'e handSome.” But my dear,” Said Sir H.D. yovt cannot always be gratified in having
A
him Mr. Drummond, for at my death you know he will of courSe be a baronet.” “ I cannot endure, Sir,” faid Julia, to anticipate evils, it was always againfl my nature, and there-ford we will, if you pleaSe, drop the fubjed:; in the iincere hope that he will continue many years, notwith’ (landing the gentleman does not feera to like the epithet, plain Mr, Drum’- * mond. ”
Mrs. Scudamore is fo perTedly ^leafed and happy with this party.
Voi. m.
K
that

WREATH OF FRiENDSHtF.
that I think Drummond has alnioli perSuaded Mr. Scudamore to purchaSe a handSome houfe and eftate, which is to be Sold in Herefordshire, nekr the
where they are to relide* Julia is quite delighted with the idea> forwt fhould all have been fixed in a corner, and Ihe would have been fhut out from
all Society; Tut with Mrs. Scudamore
/
Ihe will do vaftly well. They have already formed a thouSand Schemes how they are to pafs their time; how many Schools and manufactories they are to patronize; in Iliort, they are to be a blefling to the whole neigh* bourhood^
Mrs. Scudamore feems quire fatifi fied with her native country. As we returned from a cool autumnal walk this morning, ‘‘HoW ftiuch better is this, Lionel,’^ Said fhe, than wan-
WtEAtH tilEirJjSHtP.
irlg on the flat roofs at Madras, in
Search of a little freflu air, which was ■fure to prove fruitlefs labour^ arid end
in disappointment.

I am called to attend the company
. Adieu> my dear Mrs-.
"down
Seymour; believe me at all times,
and on all occahons, your
« *
Selima WentwoHE
LETTER LXXXIL
Henry Drummond, ESq. to the Rev^
■E.Seymout\
Livingfion, September 16, itear ihe, ye nymphs, and every fwain^

ti
I’ll tell h6w.|ulia Idves me 1”
TELL ! that She has this fmilin^
morn, ibeftowed upon me het dear hand; and in that gift is comprized all the world’s wealth.
K 2	Weftburjr
/
19^ WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
\
Weftbuiy has received the fatiYe precious preSent from Selina! Judge then, my dear Seymour, of our tranfports! but believe, that even now we ceaSe not to rememberyour friendfliip ; and have yet one willi left ungratified, that of your^s and your Eliza’s preSence on this happy day.
H. D,
iMi
LETTER LXXXIII.
%
Mrs. Scudamore, to Mrs. Seymour.
LivingRon-Ahhey, September 17.
Eliza, my dear Eliza, why were
you abSent when fo many of your friends were made happy} and when their wilh for your preSence was almoft the only one ungratified. I know
the reaSon of it, and how much it redounds to your honour; but ftill I
fed
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. I9?
feel that I Ihould have been better Sa-tisfiedJhad it been otherwile ; and had you been permitted to have fhared the felicity of your friends. 1 have, juft ftolen away fromtlie company, to give you Some account of our proceedings.
Julia
can-
dle, where are you going, Mrs. Scu* dariiore,’^ faid fhe ? “ not to leave us
long, I hopei write a Jheet Mrs. Sevmoi
5” f<
No longer than to of intelligence to
you are a ‘ ‘ tell her
Seymour.S’	‘‘ Ah,
good foul,” Said fhe; how well I love her, -and that I have been thinking of writing to her all the
not
own ftory. However, I will very Soon get the better of this indolence, and write her a very long letter by way of rccompence. Tell her I am beating Mr. Drummond moft Severely,
K 3
at

198
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
at backgammon, and that hitherto he
«
bears it very patiently,’*

I hope you do not exped an account of the weddings in a Sentimental Style,be-caule I really am not equal to Such an undertaking; neither indeed was there any thing remarkable to relate. The day was the fined of all poflible days, and the ceremony was conducted with the utmoft Solemnity. Lord Mordington
attended at the church, and was in per
/
fe(5t good humour all the day. After breakSaft the coaches were ordered, and we went to See Lord B—’s houSq and gardens, where neither Lionel or mySelf had ever been. We found it a very agreeable plan, an^*, returned home only in time to dreSs for dinner. ThedrelSes of the brides were fimplc and elegant. Lady Weftbury’s or-naments were few; on her arms flip
wore

WREATH <JF FRIENDSHIP. I9)
wore the bracelets given her by her mother; and around her neck, pendant to a ftring of pearls^ hung Lord Weftbury’s pidiire. Lady Julia had
over her girdle a fauITe mdntre, in-clofing Mr. Drummond’s hair ; and her handkerchief was faftened with a. little golden arrow, the preSent, Ihe informed me of her true love."
After tea we had a little concert; and in the hall were the Sons and daughters of the tenants of both families merrily footing it to a tabour and pipe.' It was a great addition to their pleafure to dance one dance in company with the brides and bridegrooms, who were fo
good humoured as to propoSe our go-
*»
ing down and joining this jovial crew, I do not think I ever danced in a hap. pier party. This morning Lord and Lady Weftbury went to breakfaft with
K 4
Lord
200 WRIAIH 01 FRIENDSHIP
Lord Mordington. Mrs. Wentworth
was of the party, at his particular de-fire; you cannot imagine how polite he is to her. I laugh and tell her I believe fhe will be a counteSs at laft. She Smiles through her tears, and chides me for my levity ; and in the midft of all her good fortune, cherilhes an unavailing regret for her loft huf-
This morning the gentlemen pro-
•	V
pofed a walk in the park. Nothing could be more tempting than the day, or more acquiefcing than Lady Julia and your humble Servant. Lord St. Clair, Mr. Drummond, a^id Mr. Scudamore, were our attendants. You know the beauty of the grounds, and you know alSo how I admire Jhady groves and purling (irearns. I infen-fibly led the way into a grove which
m
WReXtH of FRIENT>SHIP. 201
in the midll of fummer would be al-moll quite dark, but at this feaSon only barely excludes theLun., ‘‘ Come back, Mrs.. Scudamore,” laid Mt. Drummond, ‘‘ and do not lead me juft now to a place that always in<K fpires melancholy, even when Juhak
is leaning on my arm.
» et
Ah!, then,

faid Julia, ' “ this is the very Spot * where you met Mn. Selwyn; let us haften away, I would not Stay a moment longer in it for a.kingdom!” You muft imagine all the . kind looks of Drummond, in return for this fentcnce, and you will notj I. think> doubt his gra->-titude*' The* ftory Lhad .never heard, and wee converted. on the fubjeCl till We. got to a little riling, ground adjoining to the road leading from iWeft-buryr Lodge, and which is-Separated ■
from it by a tall hedge, of < horn-bean, , which .entirely hides the park.palin

K S
Lord i
20Z WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Lord St. Clair flopped, Mr. Scu-damore,’' Said he, “ you admire fine trees, look at that,” pointing to a poplar which was grown tc^a prodi* gious fize. Lionel, you know, k very curious, he mufl know the height of the tree, and not content with that, its circumference alSo. The gentle-
men began
meafuring.
and Lady
Julia took me by the arm and led m©
away
We had not walked many
paces when we obferved on looking back that they were all very intent upon Something, but I could not tell what. Lady Julia quickened her pace, and Lord St. Clair called out,. “ Julia ! Julia ! come here and explain this myftery ?” She coloured,.
ah. Said fhe, I thought they would discover my folly ; it was what I feared when they obferved the treck' But it is no matter now \ I may as well
tell
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 203

tdl the truth as not.

We arrived Pray, Julia,
can you explain this inscription

yf
y, H. took her lajl Uok of if. ^ What does this mean ?
Said
ladies, can you unriddle it ?
Lord St. Clair, looking very lignifir cantly athis daughter^ whoj recover-
t
ing from her confufioh, acknowledged herfelf the carver of tliefe words^ “At
the time,” faid fhe,. “ when Mr,
%
Drummond was'ly ing ill of the wounds.
* * \
he received in the fatal rencontre we
V
I *
have juft.talked of> .my heart was not much at eafe;. and: my only confola-tion was in the accounts I received of
•t
his health.. I concluded; we fliould never meet more, and determined,. if poffible, to take a lafti look.. I found out by queftioning- the Servants, the
4
day, and nearly the hour, he was to kave-the, Lodge; . and fixed upon
this
204
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
this Spot as the moll likely to give me that indulgence. I left Selina at her work, and walked about till 1 heard the noife of the carriage. I thought I fhould have funk at the found; I had hardly ftrength to lean againft this telL tale-tree; thro* that opening in the hedge I faw, the poflelTor of my heart, 4s> I thought, for the laft time. How languid and how pale he looked ! the;, very remembrance, makes me Ihuddcr*
I funk down on the bank for a conr hdcrable time,, lofl; in thought;,, and was only roufed by the found of the firft dinner bell. I returned, home,
but came the next morning, to, record
on the bark of the tree my mifery, and; what I then thought my v weaknefs ;; but you will not, I thinkv^defpife, rnp
for this confeffion, Henry ? and, Mrs. Scudamore is herfeifSfo open to thefe
'.7
• 4
im-
V,
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP,
2'0^:
9
impreffions, that Ihe will hardly be th
•A
firft to laugh at. me.”
Forever Sacred' to love fhen/^ replied Mr. Drummond, be this charming Spot! Here, my dearell Julia, we will-often return and renevy uurvows ; and.to the laft. moment- of mylife.Ihall. be remembered this au-fpicious .hour.”^ The dinner bell once more rung, unwillingly we left this interefting Scene. I then determined to fend you this anecdote, becaufe II am certain you will never hear it from , Lady Julia. My lively friend is juft
. t
come to delire the fd.v.our of my- com-, fany, ‘‘Good heavens!” Said Ihe
3
what a volume have you written, “ Yes,, and your ,LadyIhip is the prin-
»‘S
ciple heroine.”' “ Tliat is not fair, why was not Selina to have her Ihare irvthe novel > She certainly ought to

2o6 wreath of friendship.
I
have been the moll conSpicuous cha-rader; efpecially, as you began the romance of her life, you are bound to finilh it; but, come away, you (hall not to-night Scribble another line.’* There was no refufing her requeft; therefore, dear Eliza, join all our befl
^	«	t
wishes. We leave this agreeable fa-mily in three days, and pay our intended vifit to Mr. Mandeville.
#
Moll truly your’s,
Emily Scudamore.
L E T T E R LXXXIV.
Drummond, ESq.- to the Rev..
£, Seymour,
LiEing Jion-Abhey, September 19...
My Dear, Seymour,
Afn now. certain there is no Iltuation; in life, which , can make me forgetful of my friends ; or blunt that, keen, deiire I have to communicate,-
happinefs..
■WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 207
happineSs. His true the intelligence I have now to offer will not afford that pure Sentiment unalloyed; but
s
while we grieve for the Situation of one, we will flatter ourfelves that the Sufferings of the other are near an end; and without further delay I will relate to you the circumllances that have given birth to thefe reflexions, and
leave
you to comment upon
the
dark and intricate ways of Pro»
vidence.
»
Three hours ago we all affembled! at breakfaft; at that time the-poft ge-nerally arrives. All hands and eyes are-prefently employed. Lord St. Clair broke the Seal of a letter with the-
f
French ftamp, and exclaimed! Good' God! ’tis from Mr. Selwyn! what can-he poflibly have to fay to me	‘‘ Oh,
do let us hear,’’ Said my dear little
. wife,,
2:c8 wreath OF FRIENDSHIP.
wife, Oh! do let us hear,* was echoed By all the females in company. He read as follows:.
My Dear Lord,
In the -prefent exi-gency of my affairs^ I appeal to yoiir
‘‘ humanity, when I dare not to your ‘‘ friendfhip. The former, is 1 know, ever adtive ; the latter, I fear, I have ‘^•forfeited all title.to.. That ralhnefs and impetuofity which you have always Blamed, and fo often tried to moderate, has at laft, I.believe, proved my. ruin, and your predic; “ tions are verified. I am a .prifoner, at prefent, jnthe Baftile, for. having, I much fear, taken from a Luman being, his exiftence.^ My.fate. has^ indeed, beeavery untoward.,. I was
ft
leized immediately, and all • flight prevented*.
I
was not

\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 209
** Searched, and my purSe, whidi was
‘‘ tolerably full, is Hill in my pof-‘‘ fellion; and is the only means by which you could receive any knowledge of my fate. I entreat of you to ufe your intereft with the Duke ofD
CC


t, who, as public minifter, may have it in his power to efFed
my releafe. Should I have been fa fortunate as not mortally to have “ wounded my antagonift, who is a German officer, and the hulband of Mademoiselle de Sanzey, the un-
“ fortunate caufe of this event. I have
♦
not time to relate particulars, nor is my mind equal to a confeffion of all my guilt. Should I ever have the happinefs of throwing myfelf at your feet, you Ihall then be ac-quainted with the drcumSlances that led to my misfortune; and by
‘‘ accufing
((
cc
(C
((
cc
\
210 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
ce
accuiiiig myfelf, I will deprecate
vour refentment.
CC

€C
cc
My only conSolation is, that I
alone to my own re-
am not
“ flections. I have a fellow priSoner, “ who is alSo an Englilhman, ignorant of his crime, tho* he has been con-fined for Ibme years. He feems de-“ Serving a better fate than conftant afflidlion, which he fays has been his companion fince the firft twenty “ years of his life. His name is Wentworth, and he has a large eft ate in Devonshire,
This laft Sentence put an entire flop to the conclufion of the letter. Mrs. Wentworth’s tea cup dropped from her hand, and Lady Weftbury rofe from her Seat, unknowing what flie
did. In a moment Her arms were
# ^
thrown
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 211
thrown around the neck of her mother, who funk fpeechleSs into her chair. All was confulion and allonifhment! the concern wc felt for poor Selwyn at the beginning of the letter, was entirely forgotten; and we thought of nothing but Mr. Wentworth, and the lingular difeovery of his lituation.
' \
Mrs. Wentworth, recovering froipi the Itupor, Surprize had occalioned, prelTcd her daughter to her boSom, and Said, in faultering accents, “now I am Satisfied! I have lived to hear of my Charles, perhaps I may yet fee him! Oh! thou bountiful and beni-ficent Being, who haft guided my wandering fteps thro’ life, how Shall I thank thee for all flowed on a repining creature? the moments of my life will be too fhort to pour out all my gratitude! but my
Selina
this good be-

212 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP,
Selina will take up the talk, and never^ ceaSe to praiSe the author of all this happineSs.’^
It was a full hour, I believe, before^, we thought of hnilhing our repaft, were at all compoSed, or could Settle what Ilep was bed to be taken to ex^ pedite the releaSe of theSe two gentlemen. Weftbury generoully offered to Set off immediately, and proceed
to Paris as fall as pofiible.
Lady
Weftbury looked as- if fhe wifhed to be one of the party; but it was overruled, and determined that fhe and Mrs. Wentworth fhould remain at the Abbey, ’till the return of Lord Weftbury. He is gone to the Lodge to inform Lord Mordington of his intentions, and returns here to an early dinner, and means to be in I.ondon
tOrnisht.
My
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
213
My Julia is retired with her two friends, whoSe agitations are really painful, and who want both comfort
and confolation.
Poor Selina can
hardly fupport the idea ofWeftbury’s being once more at the mercy of the waves; and Mrs. Wentworth’s fears almoft get the better of her hopes. For my -own part, I feel great com-paffion for the fate of poor Selwyn, and concern for the unfortunate Rofalia, whofe imprudence, I fear, has occafioned this event ; and thank heaven, that interpofed in my favour andpreferved me from everlafting mi-fery, to confer on me fupreme blifs. Adieu, my dear friend! the poft allows me no more time for refledion. That I am ever your’s, I hope you will always believe.
H. D.
LETTER
:lI4 WRFATH OF FRIENDsMi^j
e.	*.
LETTER LXXXV.
Seym our, to Lady Julia Drnmmcni,
Wansford-IIouJey September i8t
R» Seymour and mySelf • have
Sent in proper form our congratulations to our deareft friends at •Livingfton-. Bilt a formal congratu-laiion is not Sufficient to Satisfy my full heart, tny Julia; you have ever been deServedly dear to me, and at this moment my heart expands with gratitude to that all bountiful good-hefs, who has conducted you thro’ every danger, and placed you in ^ Rate So full of blifs-. That the fame kind arm may gently lead you thro* the maze of life, free from every tormenting Care, is my molt earn eft wilh» You have every profpedt of' hap-pinefs, and I flatter riiyfclf no dark ihade will ever intercept the view*
Yoiif
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. llj
Your own good fenSe will teach you, that to enjoy with moderation and gratitude the happineSs kind heaven has beftpwed on us, is the moft ac-*-ceptable return we can make for the
s received. Drummond is in every reSpedt Suitable to )’Our difpoSi-tion ; and 1 doubt not but I lhall have the happineSs of Seeing you a pattern of conjugal felicity; and I Can from experience affure you, that no date in this world can be, Compared with that of a happy married life. Allure my dear Lady Weftbury, that I include her in all my good wiflhes. 1 never felt So. inclined to Swerve from my duty as at preSent; believe me, I am truly mortified not to make one at
n; but Mr& and Mrs.
4
WatSon will foon be at home, and We will, on the wings of friendihip.
fly to join your happy party
We
have
WREAtH OF fRiENDSHtF*
/.
have had Lord Malbourn with us for a few days; he is gone upon a Shoot* iiig party into Yorkfliire. He fays he fliall fiom thence write his con-gratulations to Mr. Drummond ; but he greatly fears they will not be Sincere, as Drummond has married the only woman he ever wilhed to call his wife. But do not be uneaSy, he feems to bear flie disappointment with true ftoical fortitude; and may in time be induced to think Some other fair-one worthy of fuch a diftindion. He is a deServing and agreeable young man, and as the greateft compliment 1 can pay him, I whh him zve// mar* ned. I am, indeed, my Julia, a fin* cere convert to your fentiments upon the fubjed of matrimony; and I hope you will yourfelf experience with how much propriety you realoned* But it
inuft not be expe<9:ed that every giddy
boy
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
217
boy and girl, whoSe romantic notions
to SeeK their hap-
entice
them
pineSs in a Scotch wedding, lliould meet with the Same golden hours, which are promiSed to thoSe only who love with truth, and marry with dis-
cretion.
We have a
convincing
proof at this moment at Wansford, that all are not happy that are married. Your o\(\friendy Mils Hargrave, has thought proper to take a trip to Gret~ na-Green with a young officer. Hi$ inducement too plainly appears to have been the profpedt of her father^s fortune; her’s, I prefume, a frolic. But they are woefully awakened from their dream of pleafure; her father has refufed to fee them or affift them;
0
his relations cannot do any thing for them : and as a laft refource they are come to her uncle’s at Wansford.
Vol. III.
L
'r
*•5
1.
N
V.
2i8 wreath of friendship
1 have never Seen them but with
9
infinite pain, for it is dreadful to look forward to a long lifeofmiSery ; and fuch, I fear, will be their lot. He is fullen, and fhe is extremely perveife. Did but the giddy unthinking part of the world fee thefe two young people as they now are, they would not flight thoSe kind admonitions their more experienced friends would fo wil* lingly give them. But I have no time for moralizing, nor you occa-
t	_
fion for my ledlures. That fucceeding years may roll on, and Hill find you happy, is the prayer of your
Eliza Seymour.
LETTER
V.

wreath OJ FftlENlSsaiP. ZIJ LETTER LXXXVI.
P
Lady Julia Lrummondy to yLx%.Seymouth
Livtngjion-Ahbeyf September 2%i
TliouSand thanks to you, my beloved Eliza, for your con-
gratulations and kind vvilhes. I
W
I
cerely hope they will be all acCoin-plilhed, and Selina and mySelfbe held, up to all our female acquaintances as patterns of conjugal felicity. I fully expected to have diSpatched this letter to you with a long account of our mirth, feftivity and feafting, but alas I the brighteft proSpefts are foonell over-fliadowed; and we are once more reduced to a ftate of care and anxiety. But I own mySelf fanguiiie enough to hope, that this is but a palling cloud, which willfoon be over, and will only Serve to render our happineSs more permanent and durable, by relloring
L z
to
220 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
feeing
to Mrs. Wentworth her long loft huf-band. Poor woman! you will eaSily conceive what her feelings will be on this oGcafion; (he is Sometimes depreft with apprehenfions, and then again exulting in the hope of once more
her beloved Charles. Lord jMordington came to lit an hour or two x\ith uslaft night. Mrs. Went worth’s Spirits had been So indifferent all day, and -as She Seemed not at all diSpoSed to take her Ihare in conversation, my mother propoSed to her to join them in ;a rubber at whill. She readily agreed to the propoSal, as indeed jQie does to every thing Ihe thinks her friends wifh her to comply with. But I could not help obServing the effort was painful to her; and therefore determined, as Soon as poffible, to releaSe her from an exertion So diSagreeable. “ I do not know what you think of
h,
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP, 221
it, good people,’^ Said I, but I look upon my preSent fituation to be completely uncomfortable; here Sit I, like a poor.forSaken matronf all alone, y'hilll Monfieur Drummond is playing off his whole artillery of compliments to the Lady- Selina, wiio, by the by, is receiving them with as many Sweet Smiles as if there were no fuch perfon as Lord Weftbury in ex-iftence. But I mull inform you, I think theSe proceedings ought to be checked at the very firft ; and therefore, if you pleaSe, Mr. Drummond, to-take Mrs. Wentworth’s cards, we will retire to her dreffing-room, to conlider in what manner her daughter ought to be puniflied, for encouraging you, in your old love of flirtation.’* She readily Saw my delign, and leaning upon my arm we quitted the room. “How much am I obliged to
L 3
V o u.
122 wreath of friendship
’ 3 ou, my dear Lady Julia,*’ Said die,
A
for thus procuring my r Who would expert So much Serioi^
thought joined to So large a fliare of
• ^
vivacity as you Seem pofleired of ; a little private convcrfation with you was the very wilh my heart was Sighing after at that inllant. My Selina’s Spirits are So very weak, I dare not tell her half my' hopes and fears, left I fhould too much deprefs her gentle frame ; and to fay the truth, her own lliare of anxiety Seems at almoft more than She can bear; it il very unfortunate Ihe Ihould be pa,rted
f
from Lord Weftbury at this time. Poor girt! when fhe conSiders the fate of her mother and grandmother, well may Ihe tremble !” “ My dear Mrs. Wentworth,” Said I, an idea So terrible I iincerely hope has never presented itfelf to her imagination;
this
i
. i
BREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 223^
this is no country of deSpotifm, nor is Lord Weftbury a ralh man; his known good fenfe and moderation will preServe him from any inconvenience his preSent Situation at Pai% might throw him into. I am, confident the only uneafineSs Selina Suffers .on his account is, his eroding the Sea at So unpropitious a SeaSon; but he will, I hope Soon return, and bring with him comfort to thoSe hearts that
I
are now So anxioufly waiting for his arrival.’* I will hope So too, my amiable friend,’* faidfhe, “and ’yet 1 will confeSs my weakneSs; even amongll thoSe Sweet reflections, I cannot avoid mingling a few of the bitter drops of regret ; I have been long Separated from my beloved huflDand, he left me in the bloom of youth, fparkling with health and vivacity; he will find me in the decline of life.
L 4
weighed.
224 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
weighed down with the iron hand of adverfity. Who can tell whether his heart will remain the Same after So many years have elapSed ?”	‘‘ Mrs.
Wentworth has, lam confident,.Sustained too many, real miSeries, to Suffer her mind to dwell long upon vain chimeras. You muft confider that every year that has rolled over your head, has likewiSe added one to the number of his; and that Mr. Wentworth, like yourSelf, has been in the fchool of misfortune, consequently his ideas will be more Suited to vour preSent frame of mind than if you ftill retained your youth and cheerfulneSs.’* She thanked me for fo kindly encouraging her, and then gave me Some #
account of thofe happy days She Spent with her dear Charles,^-at Cudalore. I did not interrupt her narrative, as the Tccolledion Seemed to give eaSe to her
mind.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 21^
mind, and for a moment to Soften Her afflidion. When fupper was an-
V	V
noimced Ihe returned to the company more compofed, aiid even, cheerful, than: I had ever feen her.
Lord' Mordington was tolerably good humoured; but he. is threatened with the gout in liis Hand^ and wilhes to be at Bath, yet does not choofe to leave the country hill his fon returns;: fo you muft allow that his temper now ’ meets with fome trials. However, I* believe, upon- the whole, he was worfe when he had nothing to vex Him, which' I fancy is often the cafe with ill tempered peoplb. They make a merit of: conquering real evils, whilft they fuL ffer trifles tp difturb their peace*
.’K
r am going to fpend' this wholc^ at Weftbury-Lodge;, which' F
L 5
220 WREATH OP FRIENDSHIP.
t
muft confeSs, is not quite agreeable to
111
jntj to leav^ my two fri tjieir prefent State of m.indi but Sir Henry and Lady Drummond go. away in the morning; and^ we Shall not fee them till we vilit them at Drum-
mond'PlaGe, I coyld not refufci
I cannot diSmifs this letter without' faying one word of poof Selwyn., To what a dreadful: Slate lias his ralli im*' petuous temper at lad’ reduced him. I am afraid in this affair he has be-haved extremely ill. I pity Made» moiSelle: de San2;ey extremely. Hovr different muft her prefent Situation be,, from the gay proSpe<5t that preSented itfelf to her view a few months ago 1 Had. pie married Drummond, I will venture to fay, Eliza, Ihe muft have been happ^i His good SenSe would have pointed out to her a path of rcc
i
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 227,
titude, from which it would have beeiii impolTible for her to have deviated. I have Some faint hope that Captain: Hermondorff is not dead; if that Ihould be the cafe, Selwyn- may yet recover his liberty; and, as what we-look upon to be our heavieft mif-fortiines. Sometimes turn out our great* eft bleflings, who knows but his pre* Sent fituation may caufe him to review
4
his paft conduct, and turn his mind to more Serious thoughts. If he does not now refled we muft give him ufk. as loft for ever.
✓
It is Drummond’s high will and. f)ieafure \hdit I Ihould immediately attend him, to Weftbury-Place; and as you know, by woeful experience, my Eliza, it is now my. duty to- obey, I? muft inftantly conclude my letter. It-iis a. frightful, word, but- as it is my
maxim^
22S WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
maxim to enjoy life to the very extent of our power, I will endeavour to banilh it from the mind of your truly affedionate
Julia Drummond,
LETTER LXXXVII.
Lord JVeJihuryy to Lady Wejlbury,
London^ September 20,
OW heavily paSs the hours, my deareft Selina, while abSent from thofe we love! What an age it feems lince I parted from you! and what an immeasurable diftance appears to divide us. If So painful al-, ready our feparation, what torments. Shall I not feel ^till we meet again h Write to me, my love, every day, every hour; and tell me all that paffea
in thN gentle heart. Tell me, thav
you
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 229-
ju think of your Weflbury every moment, and ligh for his return. Depend upon it that Ihall be as fpeedy as the nature of my bufineSs will allow ; and which I trull will bring joy . and gladneSs to my dearell girl, and, her amiable mother*

Two hours ago I alighted at L©> thian’s Hotel, and immediately took a coach to LincolnVInn, where I-found Mr. P. juft concluding a letter to mySelf, to. inform lue that Mrv
notw
K
treatment he had met with, had yeC terday abfconded, taking with him-every thing of value his. houfe contained. Where he is gone, no one knows; he has taken no fervent with him, nor left any orders- behind^. Surely this is a ftrong confeffion of his guilt. I meaiit. to haye enquired of
\
230
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP
him Some particulars about Mr. Wentworth’s fituatiojn; but, ’tis poffible, he-might not have choSen to have given me any fatisfadfion,. therefore, probably I lofe nothing by his departure. The law matters are in great for-
f
wardneSs againft him, but your father’s prefence will render lill that un« necelTary, Ilhall fet oIF very early tomorrow morning, and hope to be in France before night. AlTure your-felf that I am perffe^U'y well’, and do not let any unnecelTary fears rob you of a moment’s tranquility; I would be remembered ’tis true^ but not pain-. Take care of yourfelf, my chaipning girl, for one who lives
only to love and’ Serve you; and whoSe greateft happineSs is the being your moil, faithful; and affedionate
WeUbury...

\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 2^;I;
LETTER LXXXVIIL.
Lord Wejtbury, to Lady IVefihury.
Paris, SeftemheF'X'^,.
THO^ I breathe not the Same air
with my Selina, yet* I breathe:
i
only for her. That lovely form is for
ever preSent tor'my mmd ; and no?
^	V
change of fcene can make any change' of fentiment. Thus, in the language; of the heart could I write a volume to^ you; but bufinefs calls me from fo^ fvveet a fubjedl, and compels me to» make uSe of this leifure moment to? inform you what I have already doncj, and what I am to. do.
I travelled all night, lleeping tolerably in my chaiSe, and I arrived here at nine this morningw At the proper hour I waited on. the Duke of D—t, who received me. with the utmoft po-
litenefs.

231
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
tateneSs, heard my dory, and offered, me all his alTiftance. Nay, So forward is he in his attention, that he defires me to call on him a2:ain to-morrow to
o
hear the reSult. I muft confeSs I am very Sanguine, and look forward to an early conclufion of. this Strange affair.


From liim Iwent to the toilet of Madame Surville. She was fitting before her glaSs, her Hair en papilliote;, but file arofe at my entrance, and embracing me moft affectionately, pre* fented me to tile beaux who were attending. She afked what had brought me to. Laris, and rejoiced that She had’ once more an opportunity of feeing; me. I returned'her compliments with as good'a grace as fhej poffibly, ex*-pe6ted ; and told her,fome trifling rea-fbn, to Satisfy her curioSity.
L
\
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
233
I turned the conversation, as Soon as I could, on Selwyn. “ Ah! my dear friend!’’ exclaimed Madame Surville, “poor devil! he has managed his affairs very ill, and has been very unfortunate too; but no wonder he was fo imprudent, for nothing could be So abSurd as running away with another
My dear Ma’am, I
man s
wife.


know not a word of the ftory, pray inform me?” Oh, with all my heart. You know Rofalia de Sanzey, Ihe was to have married that lively Briton, Monlieur Drummond; but Ihe changed her mind. He was no longer on the Spot, and Captain Hermondorff‘ presented himSclf. In a few weeks after they firft met, they were married; and in a few weeks more, ftie found out that Monlieur Selwyn was much more agreeable than her Serious huf-band. He attended her constantly,
and
■WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP*
and was a favoured lover. He was going to Spend the winter at Rome; what a charming plan! Ihe longed to go Vv'ith him, and he kindly allced her to be of the party : But how were they to get away unknown to Captain Her-mondorfF? he was grave and phlegmatic, but jealous of. his honour and brave; and this was a dangerous undertaking. But the more danger, they laid, the more honour; (you muft ; how well the proverb was applied, ) and from the Opera they agreed to elope. Selwyn’s carriage and Servants were to be in waiting,^ and the hight was to favour their efcape. They got into the chaife! the Captain had been apprized of the Scheme, and was attending, with proper officers, to Seize the delinquents, which they did as Soon as they had Seated themfelves in the carriage* Selwyn drew to defend
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
^35
fend his prize; wounded his adverfary, but was taken, and conveyed to the Ballile; and Madame was hurried away to a Convent at Montauban, far from the capital and her friends, there to weep out the reft of her life in pe« nitence and prayer.
The wound of Mr. Hermondorff was very flight, and yefterday I met him airing in his carriage. His recovery has been rapid, but how your friend will recover his liberty is the queftion.” I did not reply, hope eby my means.’’ This, therefore, .is the hiftory of poor Selwyn, as told by this lively French woman, and which you
will communicate to our friends; at
/
the fame time Saying, I have no doubt of procuring for him his freedom. I am now going to reft, more out of particular care of mySelf, than any

A'. ^ >'y- / '.c
236 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
neceffity, as I do not feel at all fatigued ; but 1 remember tlie promiSe 1 made my love at parting, and will perform every part of it, being truly grateful for the kind intereft She takes in my preservation. Adieu, my deareft wife I to-morrow I hope - to have letters from you ! What a blef-fing will that be, to your faithful
^Jihury,r
\
LETTER LXXXIX.
Lady Julia Drummond, to Mrs. Seymour.
A
Livlngjion-Abbeyy September 28,
S I am certain, my Eliza, you are at this time particularly anxious to hear of our proceedings, I have requefted Selina’s leave to fend you the copies of two letters Ihe has received from LordWeftbury fince I
wrote

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 237
wrote laft. You will find every thing juft in the ftate we could have wifhed; and we are now in daily expectation of the arrival of Lord Weftbury and Mr. Wentworth.
We met with a very agreeable rencontre yefterday morning, which we found very Seasonable . ‘ ‘ pour pajjer le tems,^* in our preSent flate of Sul-penSe. Mrs. Wentworth, Selina, and mySelf, were walking upon the terrace after breakfaft, when the gardener came up to us, and Said, there was a gentleman and lady had been Seeing the pleaSure grounds and the gardens, and they had a great delire to fee the hotife; but as he had his miftrefs’s order not to Ihew it, when the family were at home he durft not admit them. “Oh pray Ihew them in by all means, James,’’ faid I, *
the
■ «
43s
WREATH dF FRIEHDSHIF^
preSent SeaSon is So unfavourable to See gardens and pleaSure grounds, that they will require the fight of a warm houfe to recompense them for their trouble. I will ftep in 'for a moment^ and tell niy mother they are comings Jufl as I had done Speaking, a very Smart lady and gentleman appeared* .As Soon as the lady call; Irer eyes on Mrs. Wentworth, Ihe ran to her, rMyOrixana 1 my dear Orixana,^^ Said (he, ‘‘ I am happy beyond ex-prelTion at once more beholding you!” “ Oh, my benefadfreSs! is it you Said Mrs. Wentworth ; ‘‘ you are the primary cauSe of all my happineSs j but for you I Ihould never have known
Mrs. Scudamore ; and then perhaps I
#
fhoOld never have Seen England.”
'• The gentleman firfl; glanced a look at Selina, then at me, and exclaimed
with
< ‘
WREATH OF FRIEISDSHIP 239
with great coolnefs, ‘^Ha, Orixana, is it poffible you can .be here !' what flrange fate can have placed you in
’ Explanation now
this lituation ?
took place on all fides, and we Soon discovered the Ilrangers to be no others than Mr. and Mrs. DenniSon* The gentleman Seemed not a little aftonilh-ed when he was introduced to Lady Weltbury, as Orixand.s daughter. I enjoyed it much. We then adjourned to the houfe, and let my mother into
the whole biftory. They have been
\
in Scotland, Seeirlg fome of Mr. Den-niSon’s friends, from whencethey are now returning, and were entirely ignorant of the arrival of Mn and Mrs. Scudamore. My father and Mr. Drummond Soon after returned from
\
/
riding; and my father, who is hofpi-tality itfelf, would not hear of their leaving us yefterday ; but we could
not
iLJ{.0 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Rot prevail upon them to Stay,longer than this morning.
y
You have Seen them both, Eliza, and therefore my comments on them "are unneceffary ; but I think her one of t he moll agreeable women I ever Saw. I cannot lay, I So much admire him; but however, he has one merit in my eyes, he Seems particularly fond
of her.
He either looked at Mrs.
Wentworth, or I fancied So, as if She had already taken up too much of his wife’s attention ; but perhaps that was only my idea, from knowing the cir-
cumflance of his not choofing to bring
«
her to Eno;iand.
O .
Adieu, my dear Eliza; when do you
write
coming ? I can only fay if y* u do not
make
WREATH OF FRI^NDSHIF. 24I
make your appearance Soon, you will for once in your life, incur the diS-pleaSure of your
Julia Drummond.
LETTER
XC.
14
O
Lorti /N’Jihury, to Lady Wefihury.
Paris, September 26,
OPE every thing, my deareft life, from the exertions of one devoted to your Service; and who will, ( however tedious the abfence from you may appear ) leave nothing un-<lone to accomplifli your wilhes, and if poffible complete your happineSs. How fliall I thank my Selina for the letters I have this day received ? Words are too poor to expreSs the fenSe I have of her kindnefs; but Ihe will
believe all I would wilh, for Ihc is all goodnels,
Vol. HI.	M	Tom
morrow.
242 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Your father, my love, is well! and in a little time will I hope tell you So 1 But I have not yet Seen him; that inmoment is not to be till to-How would your fancy dwell on our meeting, could you but know when it would happen! I have gained one great point, the unraveling the myftery of his confinement; and I have no doubt but I Ihall prove it to have been extremely unjuft. Mr. Dacre, that wretched man, is the author, I am certain, of all this mifery. When I confider the Several circum-ftances together, and every other proof of his villainy, I do not hefitate to con-^ demn him, ,as the informer againft Mr. Wentworth to this government, who are ever jealous and ready to catch at theleaft trifle ; and I do not find that they met with any other proofs of his being a fpy, ( which was ailedged
againft
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. !143
againfl him ) but Some drawings oS places in Lrance, which he had Iketched at leiSure moments. But theSe were thought Sufficient proofs of his dangerous intentions; and thus, with**
V
out farther trial, or any legal procefs> he has been in prifon ever fincea very (hort time after Colonel Wentworth’s death. The Duke ofD. has remonstrated very warmly in his behalf, and furmounted all the forms which nSually preSent themfelves on thefe occalions.
obligations to him, and I Ihall ever feel them. I hope in a very few days to leave France, and haftcn toLivingllon.
We have indeed everlafting;
O
Jarvis will tell you ( like Lizardo in the Wonder ) that I talk of nothing but Selina; She is the burden of my Song from morn to eve. May fhe be ever happy, is the Conftant prayer tef her faithful
M a
244 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
LETTER XCI.

f.
Lord IVeJlbury, to Lady Wejlhury.
Paris, September 28.
AM returning, like a Knight Er-raritj crowned with viDory, to lay my laurels at the feet of my mifireSs; and receive from her fair hands the reward of my labours. Yes, my deareft Selma, I have been fucceSsful; your Icither is at liberty ! He is now by my fide, but knows not thaf 1 am writing to one fo tenderly conneDed with him. I have not yet thought it proper to acquaint him with the joy that awaits his return to his native country; furprizes of that fort are as pernicious to the human frame as excefs of grief; and to have told him all his good fortune at once, might have been attended with fatal confequences. I reServe, therefore, Mrs. Scudamore’s
letters
wreath of friendship. 24_^
letrers for our laft day’s journey; and have only begged him to grant me the favour of conveying him to Some old friends, who anxioudy willi to fee him; and this I tdl him is all the gratification I a-Ik for an, obiisation he looks upon as iminenfe.
Yefterday I received the orders of Government for the releaC oi the two captives, and immediixely wrot to Selwyn, to lay I Ihould
^ L -I •• vw
! V,
ViUi
in two hours ; and hopea ir,. a more time not only to procure his enlargement, but that of his fellow-priloner alSo. I went as I had appointed, and was conducted along narrow melan-choly ftone paffages, till I came to the iron gates which had enclofed fo many
But your gentle nature would fiiudder to See only the entiance to a place in which your fa-
M 3	thw*
miserable beings.
'"PA
* >
246 WREATH OF PR I END SH IF.
therhas Spent So many years. They were brought to a Small room adjoining to that in which I was introduced to them. Selwyn was in extacies at the light of me, and loaded me with expreffions of thankfiilneSs; he presented me to Mr. Wentworth, whom 1 could not fee without great emotion. I Should have known him any whene fdr the father of my Selina. Neither time, grief, nor confinement, have obliterated thoSe fine features, of which you, my love, are a delicate copy. His countenance, calm and Serene, be-Speaks the Saint and the philoSopher; he was little moved “either at SelwynV raptures, or the intelligence 1 brought him, but Said Confinement was grown familiar to him, and in his own country no one remained to cheer his latter days, or take any intereft in his fate.’^ I was beginning,to reaScn away
W R E A T If 0>F ERIE N.D S H,I F'. 247
theSe depreffing thoughts, when Sel-wyn interrupted me, by alking to what kind fortune he was indebted for my interposition in his favour?^ I heard,”
that yoii; were to- be
hCj

married before, this, time: to MiSs Courtney, I. hope- nothing has prevented your happineSs taking place; and if not, how. is it that I fee you here?” I anfwered him that I had in-
V
deed, only been bleffed with the hand of my Selina three days before I heard of his confinement; and that I had left you even fo foon, to bring comfort to the afflicled ; but that his gratitude muft be offered to a much higher Being than myfelf, who was only the in'* ftrument, and not the caufe." '
1 had Scarcely finiflied theSe words,-when 1 was alarmed by the fobs of Mn Wentworth. I turned and beheld
M 4
him-
248 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
him absorbed in affliiffion. Shocked
X
at the date I Saw him in, I apologized for having unintentionally Said any thing that had awakened painful rc> fleftions. “ Alas! Sir,”' Said he, “ I am not the hero I thought mySelf! I boafted of apathy, and my heart, cold as it is, is not yet proof againft a Sweet found ; neither religion nor mif-fortunes have yet fubdued all my feelings, and it ftili vibrates at the name of Selina, once to an incomparable mother, and a lovely infant; both long loft to me. Why then am not I as infenlible as
which belonged
they arc


I permitted him to in-
dulge his Sorrow a little while, and then tried to turn the conversation to the proSpe(ft before him. He Soon regained his tranquility, and complimented me on the part I had undertaken ; faid, he rejoicod to find there
was
wreath of friendship. 249
was at leaft one virtuous being,
who
could give up his own enjoyments to diSpenSe comfort to thoSe who had no claim on his charity but that of being feilovv creatures. After a little longer conversation, I told them a coach: waited to- take them' away.. They did not expect So foo'n to-, bid; adieu to the walls of the, Baftile, nor could your father leave it without tears; So true is it, that our minds in, time grow familiar to the molt difmal ; Scenes: and'contract a kind ' oCaffee- -tion for a place they have long inha--. bited, however wretched or diSa-
c
KJ
eI\Y yn Spent- the • even i n g w i th • us ; he declined being of our party to England, but purSues his intention of wintering in.Italy anduhis morning we Separated, taking different routs.
M
.5
Ve
2
WRrA'TTl' 0«F FR rENDSH.r?-.
We are now haftening: liome with Speed ; but our hoi'Ses muff fly Swifter than an arrow to keep pace with my impatience. I return to you, my Selina, with, a heart overflowing with love, and a conSeiouSneSs of having; done my duty and adled as . I ought; how does that tliouglit conSole me for So long an abSence,^ which has beem
•Severely felt by. your
WefihvFy^.
Ill W
L E T T E Rl XCII;
'hirs,.Sejmam:, to Lady Julia Drummond.
Wansford-Houfe, September 29
O
** Hope Springs eternal in the humatr^ breaftS*
■* .‘
t {
That is a truth, my friend, we-
can all bear witneSs to ; and-how dull and inflpid would life pais
i
on
WREATH OF FRIENDskiP. 2^1
on without thoSe gentle agitations that give a relilh, to pleaSure and fofteii even pain itSelf. I am placed by a k.ind ' providence in a lot So happy, that I have not one, willi for mySelf imgratified ; but I feel. that the anxieties of others polfeSs a lhare in my breaft, and my ititereft in their hap-pinefs or miSery, mufi; Hill agitate my b,ofom with hopes and fe^rs.
Mr. Seymour and ' mySelf are par-, .licularly interested in' the fate of Mr*. ■ Wentworthj and we are much obliged"
A
to you for Lord Weflbury’s letters,,, and entreat you will not,, delay s a mo-. ment informing us of The meeting be- . tween this, once unfortunate pair. I. mult ever regret > th^t two . people fo . formed for focial ; life. Ihould by one, falfe ftep have: occafionecl So many fniSerable years tO'each ether; but .as
they
r
252
WREATH OF FRIEKPSEIF.
they, by this time, mull have repented. Severely of their error, I hope ail their future years will bring Smiling peace along with them, and allow them in grateful praife to lift up their hearts to that kind providence who has in fo unforeseen a manner Condudled them once more to happinefs.

Mr. Seymour tells me inclination has given way to duty, in my being fo long parted from the friend of my heart; but I do not agree to the charge, for where he relldes my in-
4
clinations will always lead me. I mud confeSs, however, it was, with no common pleafure, that I heard of Mr. Wat-fon’s intention of being at home this week. A few days after his arrival, v/e propofe embracing our beloved friends at Livipgfton ; and by the
length
WREATH OF FRIEKDSIUP. 253
0
length of our vilit, we will recompciil'e ourSelves for this tedious abfence..
IncloSed you will receive a


whicli I have had--from my dear Emily. Her narrative is interesting; and as youj were all acquainted with- the firft part^, you will be both, entertained and der lighted with the concluiion..
1 am. half forry Mi s-. Scudamore; feems determined to be. near you, my Julia; I did flatter myfelf the only addition her happinefs could receive would have been, in living near me. But I will not complain, as my Seymour makes up to me, by his conftant attentions, the. abfence of all my friends; and, my grateful heart is ever ready to acknowledge, how much real happinefs I have enjoyed fince
the
2‘54 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP;
I
die fortunate day I-became his wife.
I'hat you, my Julia, may enjoy an
equal fhare of happinefs, is the earneft ¥
prayer of your
Eliza Seymour.

L,E T T E R XCIIE
Mrs, Scudamorej to Mrs. Seymour.
M
September .
Write this letter from the rural re--treat of: the virtuous and amiable-
Mandeyille.
Mr. Scudamore and;
my fell Arrived here yefterday,^ in pur-fuance of a;former promife, and for a?, few minutes after our arrival fu ppofed: we had fet, our feet, in a terrellrial pa-^ radife. It, happened to be the village ' feall; the Iky was particularly ferene for this climate; and the Iliruhs and;
flowei s that adorned the green before
the
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
rt ^ ^ ^ »
the houSe, appeared in great perSeDion. The trees have not yet Ihed their leaves, but are beautified by that, charming glow of various colouring^., that the. autumn alone can produce,. The young, villageis of both SexeS’ were dancing on the velvet carpet of nature,- to the. rough mufic of a. country mufician.. The old' people: fat on benches' under the Iliady trees, looking on. The neatnefs of their Holiday Gloaths, the kind looks ote
their parents, and; the. fond glances of: the admiring bvains,. with the air of* health and clieerfulnefs that afiimated: their countenances, gave a livelinefs-and fimplicity. to the fcene, not to be. conceived’by the frequenter of draw- -ing-rooms, and the inhabitant of a hot. metropolis. To complete this group, our friend Mandevilte and his accom-.
lady,were ftanding by,as Spec--
tators.
2c6
WREATH OR FRIENDSHIP.
tators. By theSe we were received
with the moll	unafSe^ed
t
attention.,
/
After enjoying for a Ihort time the piiflurefque fcene into which we had been tranfported> we-were conducted, into a manSion,. which imprefSed you, more with the idea of elegance, and happinefs, than, of. fplendoc and, magnificence..
‘^'HeFe we have retired,'* faid'ourr friend, “ from the gay world, to en-, joy rational; pleafure, and the conver-, fat ion of thofe that* are- dear, to us.. You mull not, miftake me, we are not hermits; we fee fuch of our neighboucs as. are agreable,.as often.as we, pleare,v and thofe whoSe company does not add to our happinefs, ferve now and then
to remind us that even the brightest
iu-
WREATH or FRIENDSHIP
Kiminary has its Spots. A little, Scu-
■•.ry •
damore, miift be Sacrificed to good manners; ar.d perhaps even theSe oc-cahonal interruptions add more to our enjoyments than may be imagined. Our houSe in towrl too, we keep from neceflity. BuIineSs Sometimes leads me there, and believe me, I do not now wifh to be unaccompanied.^* TheSe I'afl: words were attended by one of the fofteft and moll exprellive Smiles towards his lady; which was refled ed back by a look which would have kindled a flame in a boSom lefs fuSceptible of gentle emotions than that of Mandeville.
The reft of the evening was Spent in converfe fweet^ and we retired to reft with thoSe feelings of tranquility, which may better be conceived than
4
described.
This
25S WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
This morning our worthy hoft invited Mr. Scudamore to a walk over his grounds, which appear to have every advantage which nature or arc can give them. As they approached a very elegant mftic temple, Situated on the top of a rock, at the foot of which a river flowed in a deep channel, and commanded a fine variety of wood and water, our friend obferved,
that as he had (hewn Mr. Scudamore;
/
what was peculiarly his 'own province, he thought it but common juftice to his amiable wife, to give him a Specimen of her tafle. ' The temple was ornamented in the mofl beautiful manner ; and what added greatly to ith-beauties in the eyes ofMandeville, allies ornaments were either made by
I
J.ady Catharine’s dire,i5lion, or with her own hand.. ‘‘ You- wjll naturaHv
fuppoSe,” Said Mandeville, thi
s
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 2^,
place muR have many charms for me. Indeed we Spend much time here. I read, and endeavour to amuSe my
fweet Kate, while die is finilhing thbSe
%
elegant drawings with which this little temple is ornamented. But, ( added he ) you have never heard, from my-» Self at leaft, how this agreable change has taken place, and how I became poflelTed of So ineftimable a treafure.. Our lituation here is favourable to my Story; and you may amuSe yoiirSelf with my Catharine’s labours, while I inform you how we became united in
pile indilToluble band.”
,	Hijlory of Mandeville concluded.
I left India, my friend, with all the fears of a lover, without any of his hopes. Indeed I had no reaSon to fup-poSe, that a young lady of high birth and the moft amiable qualifications,
Should

26xy WREATH OF FRIENDSHIF
Should remember one who was the
0 •
outcast oSfortunfe ; and who had fled from her So abruptly at the Very moment perhaps when a more bold ad-

venturer would have profited by So fortunate a difcovery. If the lady, however, faw my behaviour in a different point of view, it was a proof She had penetrated my fecret intentions; and to this very circumfiance, it is probable, I owe the continuance of her regard for me» A forward avowal ofmy paiTion would have deServed a
repulSe. But She faw the delicacy of
%
myflfuation, and attributed my fudden departure to its real motived*
Upon my firfi return to England I vifited my mother m her country retirement,. A few years before, Ihe had begun to firare my prosperity, from the remittances which had been
for-
\
WREATHOF FRIENDSHIP.
261
fortunate enough to reach her. Our meeting, you may imagine|, would not be a little interefUng ; fhe found a Son flie had loll; and I a mother, whom I was now happy enough to place in a fituation which tee Sojuftly deServed, and to which tee was in all reSpefts intitled. It was my mother’s wite not to remove from the prefent place of her abode. My firll Summer therefore was employed in ornamenting and enlarging her cottage. I puj'chafed a neighbouring farm, and made every con vend :nce that I ima-
'gined could render the remaining part of her life comfortable. We held -conSultpTions on the plans of life my two brothers were to purfue, and my filters were placed in Schools at no great difiance from home. I had -chofen profeffions for my brothers, as «ny late connexions had led me to fuf-
ped
WREATH OF FR1ENDSHII>*
pe<5t the integrity of trade. Not that I imagined the principles of commerce to be founded in a want of virtue; but that I had Seen too many inftances,
' where the delire of growing rich had
%
abfolutely led many perfons, even of reSpeflable charadters, to loSe fight of honefty. That is, their connexions
^	A
with mankind, and general trafiic with all forts of people, had led them to look lefs ftridtly on the tranfadlions of commerce,than the reclufe philofopher . or moralift would have done,’’

Having finilhed, for the preSent,.
at leaft, my employments in the country, I began to think of returning to town, where my India affairs required my prefence. My firSc place
V
of refidence there was the houSe of my generous benefadlor, by whofe means I was now enabled to look on future
days
V
thoughts.
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP, 263
days without a Sigh. Gratitude held a diftinguilhed place within my breaft, and whilft J enjoyed the gift, I was not unmindful of the giver. Do not think that during this period of time Lady Catharine was abSent from my
I tliought of her indeed, but as of one fainted for her virtues, to whom the holy hermit in his moITy cell, looks up with daily veneration. Upon enquiring I found the family of his Lordihiphad received an alteration by the death of his maiden lifter ; that his Lordfhip had been himSelf long confined to his chamber; and that his amiable, yet unmarried daughter,
was his nurSe.”

By Some accident in Conversation,
*
my efteem for this lady was made known to my friend. This produced a detail of the circumftancesi formerly
-men-
264 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIt,
ft
4
mentioned to you; and concluded with my friend’s prefling advice that I ilhouid pay a viSit to the noble Lord, my former patron. I paved the way by a letter to his Lordihip, and received
permiffion to wait upon him. I was
%
punctual to the hour he fixed; and found him greatly altered fince the time I faw him laft. He was no longer the imperious Peer that I remembered, haughty and felf-opinion-ated, but funk into an eaSy chair, and v/raptup in flannels. You fee me
here, Mandeville,”faid his Lordfhip,
* ^
not what I v:as, but bowed together with illneSs more than yeai s. There is another change in me, at which, I am fure you will rejoice. I have laid afide my old favourites, Hume and Voltaire, and am no longer a fceptic.” I fincerely congratulated him on the change, and told him that I thought
illnefs,
WIEATH OF FRIENDSHIP, aljj
iilneSs, and even his preSent debilitated Condition, well exchanged for Such
True, Man-
dangerous opinions. deville,’^ he added, and I Ihould not have been in my preSent miferable (late, if my opinions then had been ‘ fuch as they now are, I thought the dilates of nature my bell guide ; that is, I conlidered the reaSon I enjoyed, as impelling me to the pleaSures of a brute. You fee the conSequence, I am unable to aflill myfelf. But I do not repine; my preSent ftudies, tho* every line gives a ftab to my former courSe of life, lead me to contentment, and even fometimes InSpire me with tranquility.’’
My pleaSare was indeed great to hear his Lordihip talk thus rationally. I could not avoid enquiring to
VoL III

N
I
whom
A66 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP

■whom this happy alteration mull be aScribed. “To my daughter. Lady 'Catharine,your old acquaintance,’Taid the Peer. “ She has not only been my nurSe, but has all the merit of my conversion. She has read to me during my illneSs^ many books which 1 had never heard of, or at 'leaft had no wish to be acquainted with. Indeed, fhe is a good girl, and has preferred her attendance upon me, to many ad-
I .
vantageous offers from noblemen of the molt dillinguifhed charadters. Lady Catharine had never yet made her appearance, and I "knew not why, but I Seemed to have no power to enquire after her. His Lordfhip after this mention ofhis daughter rung the bell, and defired the fervant to inform Lady Catharine that Mr. Mandevillc ■avas with him* An anSwer foon returned*

.V
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 267
turned, that her Ladylhip, from an in-diSpoIition, was unable to wait u|>oii them. You cannot conceive how my heart funk within me. Tho* I never had any reafon to hope, 1 now found an uncommon propenlity to tiefpdr. After Shortening my viht I took my leave of his Lordfliip; but not without making a promife that I would foon wait,upon him again.'’
‘Mn this interval I can hardly de-fcribe my uneafinefs. I almoft wilhed I had continued in India, and fpent the remainder of my life amidft Ra-jahs and Nabobs.”
*■ ^ About a fortnight after, my fteps led me almoft involuntarily to th® door of his Lordlliip's houfe. I was foon admitted into the break faft room.
N %
wher®
268
WREATH ©F FRIENDSHIP
where I found Lady Catharine writings at a defk. If a fpeDator had been prefent, our mutual confufion would infallibly have betrayed our fituation. After a Ihort but helitating converSa* tion, her Ladylhip begged to condud me to her father. This interview, in which nothing palled but mutual civilities, relieved my mind; I found my fpirits revive, and hope began to dawn in my bread.
I Shall not, my friend, give you the hillory of my wooing; nothing is fo ridiculous as a recital of love tranf-adions. It is Sufficient to fay, our acquaintance foon increafed to friend-fhip, our friendihip to efteem, and our efteem ended in p/ain, downright, honejl, love. His Lordlhip Saw our mutual affedion, and .approved of it.
In
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP 269
In the midft, however, of this de*-lighful SeaSon, his Loidlhip’s illntSs increased to an alarming height. He bleffed us on his death-bed, and de-
' with
live^d his daughter to my care, die, Mandeviile,’’ Said he, ‘
firmer hopes than I had ever reaSon to
%
expeft. As the hour of my diflblu-tion approaches, I- feel a greater ne-cefiity for trull;. How miferable mull their Situation be who fear to leave this world, and fink into annihilation! Cherilh and protect the dear faint to whom I owe my preSent happineSs; fire deServes it of you. And for you my friend,’^ he pauSed, as if in pain, then added, nobility without virtue is a vain pretenfion.” He did not live long after this; and with unfeigned Sorrow I attended his Lordihip’s remains to the tomb of his anceftors.
N 3
J-
His
ayo WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
Hi’S title, with part of his eftatc, de-fcended to a diftant branch of his family, in the male line ; the other part, which was large, to his amiable daughter.’’
Upon the death of her father,
V
Lady Catharine retired to one of his
\
country feats. In proper time flie made me happy in the poireflion of her hand ; her heart fliehad long before conferred upon me. This was the place of her retirement; and the adorning of this temple one of her arnuSements. Congratulate me on the poffeffion of Such a treaSure ; She Subdues me by her charms, and inflrudts me by her example.”

Thus our amiable friend finished his narrative, and I have endeavoured
to
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
2*71
t ^
fo give it you in the Same, words I received it from. Mr. Scudamore, that
you may rejoice with me, in having
#
found two perfons worthy of fo much happineSs.
4
Your’s,

Emily Scudamore*,

LETTER XCIV.
Lady JuUaDrummond, to ’bAYs.SeymouT.
Livingdon-Abbeyy Odfober 4.
OU would be aStoniflried, my dearell Eliza, to See the great change a few hours has wrought in this family. Every countenance is lighted up with Smiles; and every individual feems to feel a fenlible joy which words have not the power of
N4
ex


272 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
exprefliiig. It is the arrival of Mr.
%
Wentworth that has brought about this happy efFed, We were all af* fembled in the drawing room yefter-day evening, when the door w^as haftily thrown open, and a genteel looking middle aged man entered. After darting a look round the room, he advanced towards Mrs.Wentworth, and exclaimed, ^Ht is my Orixana ! the beloved of my foul! from whom I have been So lon^ cruelly Separated. Is it poffible I have once more the happinefs of claSping thee to this
fond beating heart “ My Charles! my long loft hulband V were all the words Mrs. Wentworth could articulate; for inftantly fhe funk breathleSs into his arms. His agitation is not to be described, ‘^Have I then again loft thee, my love,” cried he, and art
thou
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 273
thou now gone for ever ? Alas, it is
my precipitation that has deprived • thee of exiflence. Good heavens !' what have I done to deferve fuch com- -plicated mifery? Am i forever doomed to behold happinefs, and when I think my blifs fecure, have it elude my grafp, and leave me more forlorn, more wretched than before.” Drummond flew to his affiftance, and very Soon after Mrs. Wentworth began to , revive. Mr. Wentworth threw him- ■ •felf on one knee by her fide as. She lay upon the fopha, and prefiing one of her hands between his, watched every ,
turn pf her countenance with unspeakable anxiety. At laft, when .fhe was nearly recovered he dropped her hand; . and clafping his own with ferVor, , turned his eyes to heaven, as if Silent-
,

^74 WREATH OF FR1E1^DSHIP»

ly returning thanks for this almofl; mU
raculous meeting.
The Scene that'^ enSued, you may
imagine, my Eliza; but I am quite
unequal to deScribe. I was indeed.
particularly affected; even now, the re-
colle6Hon of it almofl overpowers me.
When the firll tumult of their joy was
a little fubfided, Mrs. Wentworth re-
quefted Ihe might have the inexpref-
fible delight of prefenting to him
their child, hei: dear Selina! My at-
tention had been fo entirely occupied
with the pathetic meeting that had
juft taken place, that I did not, till
that moment obferve that Weflbury
was in the room, and was endeavour
ing all in his power, tp calm and
footh poor Selina, whofe fenfibility
was audible. She inflantly Sprung
for-

» I
#1

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
ns
forward, and throwing herSelf at her. father’s feet ejtclaimed, I.etme, ohl. let me, once have the Supreme happi-nefs of hearing a bleffing pronounced upon me from the lips of both my parents !” ^^May heaven Ihower.down. its choiced: bleffings on thee, thou image of the bell of women. Oh! my Selina, my child ! if you reSemble my much loved mother as much in mind as you do in perfon, I will pro-^ nouncc you worthy the affeSlion of a Weftbury. But let me praiSe as well as blefs thee ; let the firfl: words a fond
a
parent addreffes to thee, be thanks for thy Strict adherence to the laws oL obedience ; hadft.thou deviated from, them, miSery muft have, been thy portion; that was the rock we fplit upon. I, wretch that I was! raOily tempted thy mother, then young and.
m


276 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
inexperienced, to deceive the kindeft of friends, thinking, that in pofleS-fing her I could refign every other earthly confideration ; but I was^ pnnilhed where I moft merited it, by being deprived of the objedt of my tendered: affedfion. But we will now, my love,’^' taking Mrs.. Wentworth’s hand, ^‘banilh all theSe gloomy Icenes from our remembrance^ and look forward with confidence to , many years of future.blifs; trufting, , that our misfortunes have, in fome ■ meafure compenfated for our pad errors. I mull now requeft, my, Orixana, you will: introduce me to , Lord and Lady St. Clair; but where can a man find words to exprefs his , thankfulnefs to. Such, friends friends, that, have preferved his helpleSs, ^ his innocent child, from miSery,
and i

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
2)7
and ruin.

“No thanks are due
i
to me on that fcore,’^ Said my father, “ whoever your Selina Ihall favour with her Society, will be more than repaid for any care they may have on her account. I
ever love her as my own child; Ilie is alt excellence, all goodneSs; and I can truly fay. She has never occafioned me one anxious moment fince I firll knew her.’^
Mr. Wentworth bowed gracefully, but made no reply; then turning to me, Said, “ I will not trouble
any
one to inform me who this
Lady is; I am certain in theSe features I recognize Lady Julia, She whofe name has fo often echoed through our melancholy dungeon!
But
278 WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP^,
But I do not perceive any Symp^. toms of that hardneis of heart, Lordi Wellbury, which we heard fo vehemently laid to her charge ; her tears can- flow for the diftrelTes of her friends; and it is poor Selwyn. alone that has not the power of e;sciting her attention.’*
But we will not accufe her of in-fenfibility whilft Ihe can produce Mr. Drummond for a reaSon for her indifference. You fee, my Lord St. Clair,” continued he, “ I already
look upon my Self as one of your party; this excellent young man whom I ■glory in calling my fon, has made me feel more than acquainted with you all.”
My
WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP. 279
My mother now prevailed upon them to take Some refrelliment; and reminded Lord WeSlbury, that he had not Seen his father^ ‘‘ I will attend him inftantly,’^ Said he, will my Selina do me the favour ? Ex-cuSe me, 1 did not at that moment recoiled that you were only juft now reftored to a fond parent.” Allow me to anfwer for Lady Weftbury,” Said my mother, Ihe will, 1 am fure with pleafure accompany you; the ride will be of, fervice to her:
\
I am forty to fay her fp hits are not equal to ^fupport much of either . joy or grief at one time; and try if you can prevail—rrptrrr -Lord Mordington to. return with you to fupper. And Ihall I like wife requeft youj Mr. VVentworth, to condiid Mrs. Wentworth for a few minutes into the
break"

280 .WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP.
break fall room. Her feelings Seem at preSent almoft inSupportable; and I think a little private converSatioH with you more likely to calm and compoSe her mind, than any argument we can at prefent ufe.’* “How can my heart be ever grateful enough to your Ladylhip for your conlider-ation,** faid Mr. Wentworth, “how happy has been my child in meeting with fuen a benefabtrefs !’*

As foon as we had thus happily difpoSed of them we fat down to compoSe our fpirits likewise ; for our pleafure was of that enthuliaftic kind, that is not eafy to be borne.
u
Lord and Lady Weftbury returned
in lefs than an hour, and brought an
apolocv

WREATH OF FRIENDSHIP,

8i
apology from Lord Mordington, and a rcqueil that the whole party would fpend the next day with him, as he was anxious to put his Son and daughter in poIfeSSion of their new habitation, and then haften to Bath, to get entirely rid of a trouble Some fit of the gout that he has long been combating with.
Mr. and Mrs. Wentworth joined us in the Supper room, they feemed perfectly compofed and tranquil; that cloud, which notwithstanding her earnest endeavour to diffipate it, hung continually over her countenance, was entirely difperfed; and nothing remained but Serenity and cheerfulnefs. I could not avoid oneunavailing regret, that a man fo calculated to Ihine in
any Situation
, Should have been
doomed
WREATH OF FRriNDSHlF*
doomed to fpend all liis beft days in
obScurity and mifery,^
After fupper they had fome conversation upon the place they Ihould pitch on for their future refidence. Devonihire was thought too diftant. My father recommended a houfe about ten miles from hence, which I fancy will be the place*
On Thurfday we are to leave Li-vingfton; but I hope before that time Mr. Seymour and you will be here, as we depend much on your ac» companying us to Herefordshire-. Mr* and Mrs. Scudamore will there join us; and foon after I hope this party will be with us. All thefe pleaSant refledlions keep up my foirits, in -leaving a place where I have fj^ent
fo
U. of Pa.
Library
' -
/•
%
W^REATH Oi

-(
% many hours of felicity ; for in my elfimation ther%is no bleffing on earth equal to that of being furrounded by a fociety of lincere friends, where ail
is har
land cheerfulnefs.

.'V




■Julia Drummondt

4


%
4 ^	•
the end
V
nBz WREATH OF F®
time M
here, as we depend much on your ac» companying us to Herefordshire-. Mr* and Mrs. Scudamore will there join us; and foon after I hope this party will be with us. All thefe pleafant reflections keep up my Spirits, in leaving a place where I have Spent
So
\
U. of Pa.
Librapy
. d " " •
\
V -
. _ f r ^
<L
V,
1 ^
^ I
• V
• /
V
X


/w

■ \
t X


N.-	■>	^
:-.■' -N '■ /
»•.
r




\- A -



/
‘ i
. \
.f.
<
\ -
inches

I-
	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11 (A)	12	13	14	15
L*	39.12	65.430	49.87	44.26	55.56	70.82	63.51	39.92	52.24	97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06	62.15
a*	13.24	18.11	-4.34	-13.80	9.82	-33.43	34.26	11.81	48.55	-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19	-1.07
b*	15.07	18.72	-22.29	22.85	-24.49	-0.35	59.60	-46.07	18.51	1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28	0.19
D50 llluminant, 2 degree observer
Density
0.04
0.09
0.15
0.22
0.36
0.51
centimeters
0
|0iii|ilil|'/>*Miiii|2>iiMl>l|3lli|iill|^lil|llll|5lli|iiii|6iii|iiil|7lil|liii|giii|liii|9lll|llliH()
500	200
Si §1 |i s S	35 *0
MCfl
§1 Si
00 CO
600
700
300
>400
16 (M)
tkt^ad
49.25
-0.16
0.01
17
38.62
-0.18
-0.04
18(B)
28.86
0.54
0.60
19
16.19
-0.05
0.73
20
21
22
31.41
20.98
■19.43
72.46
■24.45
55.93
72.95
16.83
68.80
25
29.37
13.06
-49.49
26
54.91
■38.91
30.77
27
43.96
52.00
30.01
82.74
3.45
81.29
29
52.79
50.88
■12.72
30
50.87
■27.17
■29.46
I
0.75
0.98
1.24
1.67
2.04
2.42
Colors by Munsell Color Services Lab ^